Chemical Reaction: The transformation of chemical substance into another chemical substance is known as Chemical Reaction. For example: Rusting of iron, the setting of milk into curd, digestion of food, respiration, etc.

In a chemical reaction, a new substance is formed which is completely different in properties from the original substance, so in a chemical reaction, a chemical change takes place.
Only a rearrangement of atoms takes place in a chemical reaction.

The substances which take part in a chemical reaction are called reactants.
The new substances produced as a result of a chemical reaction are called products.
Example: The burning of magnesium in the air to form magnesium oxide is an example of a chemical reaction.
2Mg(s) + O2(g) △→ 2MgO(s)

 

Before burning in air, the magnesium ribbon is cleaned by rubbing with sandpaper.
This is done to remove the protective layer of basic magnesium carbonate from the surface of the magnesium ribbon.

Reactant: Substances which take part in a chemical reaction are called reactants.
Example: Mg and O2.


 
Product: New substance formed after a chemical reaction is called a product.
Example: MgO.

Characteristics of Chemical Reactions :
(i) Evolution of gas: The chemical reaction between zinc and dilute sulphuric acid is characterised by the evolution of hydrogen gas.
Zn(s) + H2SO4(aq) → ZnSO4(aq) + H2(g) ↑


 
(ii) Change in Colour: The chemical reaction between citric acid and purple coloured potassium permanganate solution is characterised by a change in colour from purple to colourless.
The chemical reaction between sulphur dioxide gas and acidified potassium dichromate solution is characterized by a change in colour from orange to green.

(iii) Change in state of substance: The combustion reaction of candle wax is characterised by a change in state from solid to liquid and gas (because the wax is a solid, water formed by the combustion of wax is a liquid at room temperature whereas, carbon dioxide produced by the combustion of wax is a gas). There are some chemical reactions which can show more than one characteristics.

(iv) Change in temperature: The chemical reaction between quick lime water to form slaked lime is characterized by a change in temperature (which is a rise in temperature).
The chemical reaction between zinc granules and dilute sulphuric acid is also characterised by a change in temperature (which is a rise in temperature).


 
(v) Formation of precipitate: The chemical reaction between sulphuric acid and barium chloride solution is characterised by the formation of a white precipitate of barium sulphate.
BaCl2(aq) + H2SO4(aq) → BaSO4(s) (ppt) + 2HCl(aq)

What is a chemical Equation Class 10?
Chemical Equation: Representation of chemical reaction using symbols and formulae of the substances is called Chemical Equation.
Example: A + B → C + D
In this equation, A and B are called reactants and C and D are called the products. The arrow shows the direction of the chemical reaction. Condition, if any, is written generally above the arrow.

When hydrogen reacts with oxygen, it gives water. This reaction can be represented by the following chemical equation:
Hydrogen + Oxygen → Water
H2 + O2 → H2O
In the first equation, words are used and in second, symbols of substances are used to write the chemical equation. For convenience, the symbol of substance is used to represent chemical equations.
A chemical equation is a way to represent the chemical reaction in a concise and informative way.
A chemical equation can be divided into two types: Balanced Chemical Equation and Unbalanced Chemical Equation.


 
(a) Balanced Chemical Equation: A balanced chemical equation has the number of atoms of each element equal on both sides.
Example: Zn + H2SO4 → ZnSO4 + H2
In this equation, numbers of zinc, hydrogen and sulphate are equal on both sides, so it is a Balanced Chemical Equation.
According to the Law of Conservation of Mass, mass can neither be created nor destroyed in a chemical reaction. To obey this law, the total mass of elements present in reactants must be equal to the total mass of elements present in products.

(b) Unbalanced Chemical Equation: If the number of atoms of each element in reactants is not equal to the number of atoms of each element present in the product, then the chemical equation is called Unbalanced Chemical Equation.
Example: Fe + H2O → Fe3O4 + H2
In this example, a number of atoms of elements are not equal on two sides of the reaction. For example; on the left-hand side only one iron atom is present, while three iron atoms are present on the right-hand side. Therefore, it is an unbalanced chemical equation.


 
Balancing a Chemical Equation: To balance the given or any chemical equation, follow these steps:
Fe + H2O → Fe3O4 + H2
Write the number of atoms of elements present in reactants and in products in a table as shown here.

Name of atom	No. of atoms in the reactant	No. of atoms in the product
Iron	1	3
Hydrogen	2	2
Oxygen	1	4
Balance the atom which is maximum in number on either side of a chemical equation.
In this equation, the number of oxygen atom is the maximum on the RHS.
To balance the oxygen, one needs to multiply the oxygen on the LHS by 4, so that, the number of oxygen atoms becomes equal on both sides.
Fe + 4 × H2O → Fe3O4 + H2
Now, the number of hydrogen atoms becomes 8 on the LHS, which is more than that on the RHS. To balance it, one needs to multiply the hydrogen on the RHS by 4.
Fe + 4 × H2O → Fe3O4 + 4 × H2
After that, the number of oxygen and hydrogen atoms becomes equal on both sides. The number of iron is one on the LHS, while it is three on the RHS. To balance it, multiply the iron on the LHS by 3.
3 × Fe + 4 × H2O → Fe3O4 + 4 × H2
Now the number of atoms of each element becomes equal on both sides. Thus, this equation becomes a balanced equation.

Name of atom	No. of atoms in the reactant	No. of atoms in the product
Iron	3	3
Hydrogen	8	8
Oxygen	4	4
After balancing, the above equation can be written as follows:
3Fe + 4H2O → Fe3O4 + 4H2.

To Make Equations More Informative:
Writing the symbols of physical states of substances in a chemical equation:
By writing the physical states of substances, a chemical equation becomes more informative.

Gaseous state is represented by symbol (g).
Liquid state is represented by symbol (l).
Solid state is written by symbol (s).
Aqueous solution is written by symbol (aq).
Writing the condition in which reaction takes place: The condition is generally written above and/or below the arrow of a chemical equation.
Thus, by writing the symbols of the physical state of substances and condition under which reaction takes place, a chemical equation can be made more informative.

What are the types of a chemical reaction Class 10?
Types of Chemical Reactions: Combination Reaction, Decomposition Reaction, Displacement Reaction, Double Displacement Reaction, Neutralization Reactions, Exothermic – Endothermic Reactions and Oxidation-Reduction Reactions.

Types of Chemical Reactions:
Chemical reactions can be classified in following types:
(i) Combination Reaction: Reactions in which two or more reactants combine to form one product are called Combination Reactions.
A general combination reaction can be represented by the chemical equation given here:
A + B → AB
Examples:
When magnesium is burnt in the air (oxygen), magnesium oxide is formed. In this reaction, magnesium is combined with oxygen.
Mg(s) + O2(g) → 2MgO(s)
Magnesium + Oxygen → Magnesium Oxide


 
When carbon is burnt in oxygen (air), carbon dioxide is formed. In this reaction, carbon is combined with oxygen.
C (s) + O2(g) → CO2(g)
Carbon + Oxygen → Carbon dioxide

(ii) Decomposition Reaction: Reactions in which one compound decomposes in two or more compounds or elements are known as Decomposition Reaction. A decomposition reaction is just the opposite of combination reaction.
A general decomposition reaction can be represented as follows :
AB → A + B
Examples:
When calcium carbonate is heated, it decomposes into calcium oxide and carbon dioxide.
CaCO3(s) heat−→− CaO(s) + CO2(g)
Calcium carbonate → Calcium oxide + Carbon dioxide

When ferric hydroxide is heated, it decomposes into ferric oxide and water
2Fe(OH)3(s) △→ Fe2O3(s) + 3H2O(l)

Thermal Decomposition: The decomposition of a substance on heating is known as Thermal Decomposition.
Example: 2Pb(NO3)2(s) heat−→− 2PbO(s) + 4NO2(g) + O2(g)

Electrolytic Decomposition: Reactions in which compounds decompose into simpler compounds because of passing of electricity, are known as Electrolytic Decomposition. This is also known as Electrolysis.
Example: When electricity is passed in water, it decomposes into hydrogen and oxygen.
2H2O(l) Undefined control sequence \xrightarrow 2H2(g) + O2(g)

Photolysis or Photo Decomposition Reaction: Reactions in which a compound decomposes because of sunlight are known as Photolysis or Photo Decomposition Reaction.
Example: When silver chloride is put in sunlight, it decomposes into silver metal and chlorine gas.
2AgCl(s) (white) Sunlight−→−−−−− 2Ag(s) (grey) + Cl2(g)

Photographic paper has a coat of silver chloride, which turns into grey when exposed to sunlight. It happens because silver chloride is colourless while silver is a grey metal.

(iii) Displacement Reaction: The chemical reactions in which a more reactive element displaces a less reactive element from a compound is known as Displacement Reactions. Displacement reactions are also known as Substitution Reaction or Single Displacement/ replacement reactions.
A general displacement reaction can be represented by using a chemical equation as follows :
A + BC → AC + B
Displacement reaction takes place only when ‘A’ is more reactive than B. If ‘B’ is more reactive than ‘A’, then ‘A’ will not displace ‘C’ from ‘BC’ and reaction will not be taking place.
Examples:
When zinc reacts with hydrochloric acid, it gives hydrogen gas and zinc chloride.
Zn(s) + 2HCl(aq) → ZnCl2(aq) + H2(g)

When zinc reacts with copper sulphate, it forms zinc sulphate and copper metal.
Zn(s) + CuSO4(aq) → ZnSO4(aq) + Cu(s)

(iv) Double Displacement Reaction: Reactions in which ions are exchanged between two reactants forming new compounds are called Double Displacement Reactions.
AB + CD → AC + BD
Examples:
When the solution of barium chloride reacts with the solution of sodium sulphate, white precipitate of barium sulphate is formed along with sodium chloride.
BaCl2(aq) + Na2SO4(aq) → BaSO4(s) (Precipitate) + 2NaCl(aq)

When sodium hydroxide (a base) reacts with hydrochloric acid, sodium chloride and water are formed.
NaOH(aq) + HCl(aq) → NaCl(aq) + H2O(l)

Note: Double Displacement Reaction, in which precipitate is formed, is also known as precipitation reaction. Neutralisation reactions are also examples of double displacement reaction.

Precipitation Reaction: The reaction in which precipitate is formed by the mixing of the aqueous solution of two salts is called Precipitation Reaction.
Example:
Chemical Reactions and Equations Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 1 1

Neutralization Reaction: The reaction in which an acid reacts with a base to form salt and water by an exchange of ions is called Neutralization Reaction.
Example:
Chemical Reactions and Equations Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 1 2

(v) Oxidation and Reduction Reactions:
Oxidation: Addition of oxygen or non-metallic element or removal of hydrogen or metallic element from a compound is known as Oxidation.
Elements or compounds in which oxygen or non-metallic element is added or hydrogen or metallic element is removed are called to be Oxidized.
Reduction: Addition of hydrogen or metallic element or removal of oxygen or non-metallic element from a compound is called Reduction.
The compound or element which goes under reduction in called to be Reduced.
Oxidation and Reduction take place together.
Oxidizing agent:

The substance which gives oxygen for oxidation is called an Oxidizing agent.
The substance which removes hydrogen is also called an Oxidizing agent.
Reducing agent:

The substance which gives hydrogen for reduction is called a Reducing agent.
The substance which removes oxygen is also called a Reducing agent.
The reaction in which oxidation and reduction both take place simultaneously is called Redox reaction.
When copper oxide is heated with hydrogen, then copper metal and hydrogen are formed.
CuO + H2 → Cu + H2O
(i) In this reaction, CuO is changing into Cu. Oxygen is being removed from copper oxide. Removal of oxygen from a substance is called Reduction, so copper oxide is being reduced to copper.

(ii) In this reaction, H2 is changing to H2O. Oxygen is being added to hydrogen. Addition of oxygen to a substance is called Oxidation, so hydrogen is being oxidised to water.

The substance which gets oxidised is the reducing agent.
The substance which gets reduced is the oxidizing agent.
(vi) Exothermic and Endothermic Reactions:
Exothermic Reaction: Reaction which produces energy is called Exothermic Reaction. Most of the decomposition reactions are exothermic.
Example:
Respiration is a decomposition reaction in which energy is released.
Chemical Reactions and Equations Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 1 3
When quick lime (CaO) is added to water, it releases energy.
Chemical Reactions and Equations Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 1 4

Endothermic Reaction: A chemical reaction in which heat energy is absorbed is called Endothermic Reaction.
Example: Decomposition of calcium carbonate.
Chemical Reactions and Equations Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 1 5

Effects of Oxidation Reactions in Everyday life: Corrosion and Rancidity.
Corrosion: The process of slow conversion of metals into their undesirable compounds due to their reaction with oxygen, water, acids, gases etc. present in the atmosphere is called Corrosion.
Example: Rusting of iron.

Rusting: Iron when reacts with oxygen and moisture forms red substance which is called Rust.
Chemical Reactions and Equations Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 1 6

The rusting of iron is a redox reaction.
Corrosion (rusting) weakens the iron and steel objects and structures such as railings, car bodies, bridges and ships etc. and cuts short their life.
Methods to Prevent Rusting

By painting.
By greasing and oiling.
By galvanisation.
Corrosion of Copper: Copper objects lose their lustre and shine after some time because the surface of these objects acquires a green coating of basic copper carbonate, CuCO3.Cu(OH)2 when exposed to air.
Chemical Reactions and Equations Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 1 7

Corrosion of Silver Metal: The surface of silver metal gets tarnished (becomes dull) on exposure to air, due to the formation of a coating of black silver sulphide(Ag2S) on its surface by the action of H2S gas present in the air.
Chemical Reactions and Equations Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 1 8

Rancidity: The taste and odour of food materials containing fat and oil changes when they are left exposed to air for a long time. This is called Rancidity. It is caused due to the oxidation of fat and oil present in food materials.

Methods to prevent rancidity:

By adding anti-oxidant.
Vacuum packing.
Replacing air by nitrogen.
Refrigeration of foodstuff.
1. Chemical Reaction: During chemical reactions, the chemical composition of substances changes or new substances are formed.

2. Chemical Equation: Chemical reactions can be written in chemical equation form which should always be balanced.

3. Types of Chemical Reactions:

Combination reaction: A single product is formed from two or more reactants.
2Mg + O2 → 2MgO

Decomposition reaction: A single reactant breaks down to yield two or more products.

Thermal decomposition: 2Pb(NO2)2 → 2PbO + 4NO2 + O2
Electrolysis: 2H20 → 2H2 + O2
Photochemical reaction: 2AgBr → 2Ag + Br2
Displacement reaction: One element is displaced by another element.
Zn + CuSO4 → ZnSO4 + Cu

Double displacement reaction: Exchange of ions between reactants.
AgNO3 + NaCl → AgCl + NaNO3

Redox reaction: Both oxidation and reduction take place simultaneously.
CuO + H2 → Cu + H2O

Exothermic reaction: A chemical reaction in which heat energy is evolved.
C + O2 → CO2 (g) + heat

Endothermic reaction: A chemical reaction in which heat energy is absorbed.
ZnCO3 + Heat → ZnO + CO2

Redox reaction: Chemical reaction in which both oxidation and reduction take place simultaneously.

4. Oxidation: Reaction that involves the gain of oxygen or loss of hydrogen.

5. Reduction: Reaction that shows the loss of oxygen or gain of hydrogen.
ZnO + C → Zn + CO
ZnO is reduced to Zn—reduction. C is oxidized to CO—Oxidation.

6. Effects of Oxidation Reactions in Our Daily Life:

Corrosion: It is an undesirable change that occurs in metals when they are attacked by moisture, air, acids and bases.
Example, Corrosion (rusting) of Iron: Fe2O3. nH2O (Hydrated iron oxide)
Rancidity: Undesirable change that takes place in oil containing food items due to the oxidation of fatty acids.
Preventive methods of rancidity: Adding antioxidants to the food materials, storing food in the airtight container, flushing out air with nitrogen gas and refrigeration.

Indicators: Indicators are substances which indicate the acidic or basic nature of the solution by the colour change.
Types of Indicator: There are many types of indicators. Some common types of indicators are:

1. Natural Indicators: Indicators obtained from natural sources are called Natural Indicators. Litmus, turmeric, red cabbage, China rose, etc., are some common natural indicators used widely to show the acidic or basic character of substances.
Litmus: Litmus is obtained from lichens. The solution of litmus is purple in colour. Litmus paper comes in two colours- blue and red.
An acid turns blue litmus paper red.
A base turns red litmus paper blue.


 
Turmeric: Turmeric is another natural indicator. Turmeric is yellow in colour. Turmeric solution or paper turns reddish brown with base. Turmeric does not change colour with acid.

Red Cabbage: The juice of red cabbage is originally purple in colour. Juice of red cabbage turns reddish with acid and turns greenish with base.


 
2. Olfactory Indicator: Substances which change their smell when mixed with acid or base are known as Olfactory Indicators. For example; Onion, vanilla etc.
Onion: Paste or juice of onion loses its smell when added with base. It does not change its smell with acid.
Vanilla: The smell of vanilla vanishes with base, but its smell does not vanish with an acid.
Olfactory Indicators are used to ensure the participation of visually impaired students in the laboratory.


 
3. Synthetic Indicator: Indicators that are synthesized in the laboratory are known as Synthetic Indicators. For example; Phenolphthalein, methyl orange, etc.
Phenolphthalein is a colourless liquid. It remains colourless with acid but turns into pink with a base.
Methyl orange is originally orange in colour. It turns into the red with acid and turns into yellow with base.

Indicator	Original Colour	Acid	Base
Red litmus	Red	No Change	Blue
Blue litmus	Blue	Red	No change
Turmeric	Yellow	No Change	Reddish brown
Red cabbage juice	Purple	Reddish	Greenish yellow
Phenolphthalein	Colourless	Colourless	Pink
Methyl Orange	Orange	Red	Yellow
Onion	n/a	No change	Smell vanishes
Vanilla	n/a	No change	Smell vanishes
Acids: Acids are sour in taste, turn blue litmus red, and dissolve in water to release H+ ions.
Example: Sulphuric acid (H2SO4), Acetic Acid (CH3COOH), Nitric Acid (HNO3) etc.
Properties of Acids:

Acids have a sour taste.
Turns blue litmus red.
Acid solution conducts electricity.
Release H+ ions in aqueous solution.
Types of Acids: Acids are divided into two types on the basis of their occurrence i.e., Natural acids and Mineral acids.
(i) Natural Acids: Acids which are obtained from natural sources are called Natural Acids or Organic Acids.
Examples:
Methanoic acid (HCOOH)
Acetic acid (CH3COOH)
Oxalic acid (C2H2O4) etc.

Organic Acids and their Sources
Acids	Sources
Acetic acid	Vinegar
Ascorbic acid	Guava, amla
Citric acid	Lemon, orange and other citrus fruits
Lactic acid	Sour milk, curd
Methanoic acid	Ant sting, nettle sting
Oxalic acid	Tomato
Tartaric acid	Tamarind
(ii) Mineral Acids: Acids that are prepared from minerals are known as Mineral Acids Example; Inorganic acids, man-made acids or synthetic acid are also known as Mineral Acids.
Example:
Hydrochloric acid (HCl)
Sulphuric acid (H2SO4)
Nitric acid (HNO3)
Carbonic acid (H2CO3)
Phosphoric acid (H3PO4) etc.

Chemical Properties of Acid:
(i) Reaction of acids with metal: Acids give hydrogen gas along with respective salt when they react with a metal.
Metal + Acid → Salt + Hydrogen
Examples:
Hydrogen gas and zinc chloride are formed when hydrochloric acid reacts with zinc metal.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 1


 
Hydrogen gas and sodium sulphate are formed when sulphuric acid reacts with sodium metal.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 2

Test For Hydrogen Gas: The gas evolved after reaction of acid with metal can be tested by bringing a lighted candle near it. If the gas bums with a pop sound, then it confirms the evolution of hydrogen gas. Burning with pop sound is the characteristic test for hydrogen gas.

(ii) Reaction of acids with metal carbonate: Acids give carbon dioxide gas and respective salts along with water when they react with metal carbonates.
Metal carbonate + Acid → Salt + Carbon dioxide + Water
Examples:
Hydrochloric acid gives carbon dioxide gas, sodium chloride along with water when reacts with sodium carbonate.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 3


 
Sulphuric acid gives calcium sulphate, carbon dioxide gas, calcium sulphate and water when it reacts with calcium carbonate
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 4
Nitric acid gives sodium nitrate, water and carbon dioxide gas when it reacts with sodium carbonate.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 5

(iii) Reaction of acid with hydrogen carbonates (bicarbonates): Acids give carbon dioxide gas, respective salt and water when they react with metal hydrogen carbonate.
Acid + Metal hydrogen carbonate → Salt + Carbon dioxide + Water
Example:
Sulphuric acid gives sodium sulphate, Carbon dioxide gas and water when it reacts with sodium bicarbonate.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 6


 
Test For Evolution of Carbon Dioxide Gas: Carbon dioxide turns lime water milky when passed through it. This is the characteristic test for carbon dioxide gas.
The gas evolved because of reaction of the acid with metal carbonate or metal hydrogen carbonate turns lime water milky. This shows that the gas is carbon dioxide gas. This happens because of the formation of a white precipitate of calcium carbonate.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 7
But when excess of carbon dioxide is passed through lime water, it makes milky colour of lime water disappear. This happens because of formation of calcium hydrogen carbonate. As calcium hydrogen carbonate is soluble in water, thus, the milky colour of solution mixture disappears.

Common in Acids: Acids give hydrogen gas when they react with metal. This shows that all acids contains hydrogen. For example; Hydrochloric acid (HCl), sulphuric acid (H2SO4), nitric acid (HNO3), etc.
When an acid is dissolved in water, it dissociates hydrogen. The dissociation of hydrogen ion in aqueous solution is the common property in all acids. Because of the dissociation of hydrogen ion in aqueous solution, an acid shows acidic behaviour.
Examples:
Hydrochloric acid (HCl) gives hydrogen ion (H+) and chloride ion (Cl–) when it is dissolved in water.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 8
Acetic acid (CH3COOH) gives acetate ion (CH3COO–) and hydrogen ion (H+).
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 9

Acids

Strong Acids
An acid which is completely ionised in water and produces (H+) is called Strong Acid.
Examples: Hydrochloric acid (HCl), Sulphuric acid (H2SO4), Nitric acid (HNO3)

Weak Acids
An acid which is partially ionised in water and thus produces a small amount of hydrogen ions (H+) is called a Weak Acid.
Example: Acetic acid (CH3COOH), Carbonic acid (H2CO3)


 
When a concentrated solution of acid is diluted by mixing water, then the concentration of Hydrogen ions (H+) or hydronium ion (H3O–) per unit volume decreases.

Bases: Bases are bitter in taste, have soapy touch, turn red litmus blue and give hydroxide ions (OH–) in aqueous solution.
Examples: Sodium hydroxide (caustic soda) – NaOH
Calcium hydroxide – Ca(OH)2
Potassium hydroxide (caustic potash) – (KOH)

Properties of Bases:

Have a bitter taste.
Soapy to touch.
Turns red litmus blue.
Conducts electricity in solution.
Release OH– ions in Aqueous Solution
Types of bases: Bases can be divided in two types – Water soluble and Water-insoluble.
The hydroxide of alkali and alkaline earth metals are soluble in water. These are also known as alkali.
For example; sodium hydroxide, magnesium hydroxide, calcium hydroxide, etc. Alkali is considered a strong base.

Chemical properties of bases:
(i) Reaction of Base with Metals: When alkali (base) reacts with metal, it produces salt and hydrogen gas.
Alkali + Metal → Salt + Hydrogen
Examples: Sodium hydroxide gives hydrogen gas and sodium zincate when reacts with zinc metal.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 10
Sodium aluminate and hydrogen gas are formed when sodium hydroxide reacts with aluminium metal.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 11

(ii) Reaction of Base with Oxides of Non-metals: Non-metal oxides are acidic in nature. For example; carbon dioxide is a non-metal oxide. When carbon dioxide is dissolved in water it produces carbonic acid.
Therefore, when a base reacts with non-metal oxide, both neutralize each other resulting respective salt and water.
Base + Non-metal oxide → Salt + Water
(Non-metal oxides are acidic in nature)
Examples:
Sodium hydroxide gives sodium carbonate and water when it reacts with carbon dioxide.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 12
Calcium hydroxide gives calcium carbonate and water when it reacts with carbon dioxide.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 13

(iii) Neutralisation Reaction: An acid neutralizes a base when they react with each other and respective salt and water are formed.
Acid + Base → Salt + Water
Since, the reaction between acid and base both neutralize each other, hence, it is also known as Neutralization Reaction.
Examples: Sodium chloride and water are formed when hydrochloric acid reacts with sodium hydroxide (a strong base).
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 14
In a similar way, calcium chloride is formed along with water when hydrochloric acid reacts with calcium hydroxide (a base).
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 15

(iv) Reaction of Acid with Metal Oxides: Metal oxides are basic in nature. Thus, when an acid reacts with a metal oxide both neutralize each other. In this reaction, the respective salt and water are formed.
Acid + Metal Oxide → Salt + Water
(Metal oxides are basic in nature)
Examples:
Calcium is a metal, thus, calcium oxide is a metallic oxide which is basic in nature. When an acid, such as hydrochloric acid, reacts with calcium oxide, neutralization reaction takes place and calcium chloride, along with water is formed.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 16
Similarly, when sulphuric acid reacts with zinc oxide, zinc sulphate and water are formed.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 17

Common in all bases: A base dissociates hydroxide ion in water, which is responsible for the basic behaviour of a compound.
Example: When sodium hydroxide is dissolved in water, it dissociates hydroxide ion and sodium ion.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 18
Similarly, when potassium hydroxide is dissolved in water, it dissociates hydroxide ion and potassium ion.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 19
Thus, the base shows its basic character because of dissociation of hydroxide ion.

Neutralisation Reaction: When an acid reacts with a base, the hydrogen ion of acid combines with the hydroxide ion of base and forms water. As these ions combine together and form water instead of remaining free, thus, both neutralize each other.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 20
Example: When sodium hydroxide (a base) reacts with hydrochloric acid, sodium hydroxide breaks into a sodium ion and hydroxide ion and hydrochloric acid breaks into hydrogen ion and chloride ion.
Hydrogen ion and hydroxide ion combine together and form water, while sodium ion and chloride ion combine together and form sodium chloride.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 21

Dilution of Acid and Base: The concentration of hydrogen ion in an acid and hydroxide ion in a base, per unit volume, shows the concentration of acid or base.

By mixing of acid to water, the concentration of hydrogen ion per unit volume decreases. Similarly, by addition of base to water, the concentration of hydroxide ion per unit volume decreases. This process of addition of acid or base to water is called Dilution and the acid or base is called Diluted.

The dilution of acid or base is exothermic. Thus, acid or base is always added to water and water is never added to acid or base. If water is added to a concentrated acid or base, a lot of heat is generated, which may cause splashing out of acid or base and may cause severe damage as concentrated acid and base are highly corrosive.

Strength of Acid and Base: Acids in which complete dissociation of hydrogen ion takes place are called Strong Acids. Similarly, bases in which complete dissociation of hydroxide ion takes place are called Strong Bases.
In mineral acid, such as hydrochloric acid, sulphuric acid, nitric acid, etc. hydrogen ion dissociates completely and hence, they are considered as strong acids. Since inorganic acids hydrogen ions do not dissociate completely, so they are weak acids.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 22
For water or neutral solutions : pH = 7
For acidic solutions : pH < 7
For basic solution : pH > 7

Universal Indicator: Using a litmus paper, phenolphthalein, methyl orange, etc. only the acidic or basic character of a solution can be determined, but the use of these indicators does not give the idea about the strength of acid or base. So, to get the strength as well as acidic and basic nature of a given solution universal indicator is used.

Universal indicator shows different colour over the range of pH value from 1 to 14 for a given solution. Universal indicator is available both in the form of strips and solution. Universal indicator is the combination of many indicators, such as water, propanol, phenolphthalein, sodium salt, sodium hydroxide, methyl red, bromothymol blue monosodium salt, and thymol blue monosodium salt. The colour matching chart is supplied with a universal indicator which shows the different colours for different values of pH.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 23

pH value shown by different colours role of pH everyday life:
(i) pH in our digestive system: Dilute HCl (Hydrochloric acid) helps in digestion of food (proteins) in our stomach. Excess acid in stomach causes acidity (indigestion). Antacids like magnesium hydroxide [Mg(OH)2] also known as milk of magnesia and sodium hydrogen carbonate (baking soda) are used to neutralize excess acid.

(ii) Tooth decay caused by acids: The bacteria present in our mouth converts the sugar into acids. When the pH of acid formed in the mouth falls below 5.5, tooth-decaying starts. The excess acid has to be removed by cleaning the teeth with a good quality toothpaste because these kinds of toothpaste are alkaline in nature.

(iii) Soil of pH and plant growth: Most of the plants have a healthy growth when the soil has a specific pH (close to 7) range which should be neither alkaline nor highly acidic. Therefore,

Compound ‘X’ is Sodium hydroxide (NaOH).
Compound ‘A’ is Zinc sulphate (ZnSO4).
Compound ‘B’ is Sodium chloride (NaCl).
Compound ‘C’ is Sodium acetate (CH3COONa)
Salts: Salts are the ionic compounds which are produced after the neutralization reaction between acid and base. Salts are electrically neutral. There are number of salts but sodium chloride is the most common among them. Sodium chloride is also known as table salt or common salt. Sodium chloride is used to enhance the taste of food.

Characteristics of salt:

Most of the salts are crystalline soild.
Salts may be transparent or opaque.
Most of the salts are soluble in water.
Solution of the salts conducts electricity in their molten state also.
The salt may be salty, sour, sweet, bitter and umami (savoury).
Neutral salts are odourless.
Salts can be colourless or coloured.
Family of Salt: Salts having common acidic or basic radicals are said to belong to the same family.
Example:
(i) Sodium chloride (NaCl) and Calcium chloride (CaCl2) belongs to chloride family.
(ii) Calcium chloride (CaCl2) and Calcium sulphate (CaSO4) belongs to calcium family.
(iii) Zinc chloride (ZnCl2) and Zinc sulphate (ZnSO4) belongs to the zinc family.

Neutral, Acidic and Basic Salts:
(i) Neutral Salt: Salts produced because of reaction between a strong acid and strong base are neutral in nature. The pH value of such salts is equal to 7, i.e. neutral.
Example : Sodium chloride, Sodium sulphate. Postassium chloride, etc.

Sodium chloride (NaCl): It is formed after the reaction between hydrochloric acid (a strong acid) and sodium hydroxide (a strong base).
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 24

Sodium Sulphate (Na2SO4): It is formed after the reaction between sodium hydroxide (a strong base) and sulphuric acid ( a strong acid).
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 25

Potassium Chloride (KCl): It is formed after the reaction between potassium hydroxide (a strong base) and hydrochloric acid (a strong acid).
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 26

(ii) Acidic Salts: Salts which are formed after the reaction between a strong acid and weak base are called Acidic salts. The pH value of acidic salt is lower than 7. For example Ammonium sulphate, Ammonium chloride, etc.
Ammonium chloride is formed after reaction between hydrochloric acid (a strong acid) and ammonium hydroxide (a weak base).
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 27
Ammonium sulphate is formed after reaction between ammonium hydroxide (a weak base) and sulphuric acid (a strong acid).
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 28

(iii) Basic Salts: Salts which are formed after the reaction between a weak acid and strong base are called Basic Salts. For example; Sodium carbonate, Sodium acetate, etc.
Sodium carbonate is formed after the reaction between sodium hydroxide (a strong base) and carbonic acid (a weak acid).
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 29
Sodium acetate is formed after the reaction between a strong base, sodium hydroxide (a strong base) and acetic acid, (a weak acid).
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 30

Cause of formation of acidic, basic and neutral salts:

When a strong acid reacts with a weak base, the base is unable to fully neutralize the acid. Due to this, an acidic salt is formed.
When a strong base reacts with a weak acid, the acid is unable to fully neutralize the base. Due to this, a basic salt is formed.
When equally strong acid and a base react, they fully neutralize each other. Due to this, a neutral salt is formed.
pH value of salt:

Neutral salt: The pH value of a neutral salt is almost equal to 7.
Acidic salt: The pH value of an acidic salt is less than 7.
Basic salt: The pH value of a basic salt is more than 7.
Some Important Chemical Compounds
1. Common Salt (Sodium Chloride): Sodium chloride (NaCl) is also known as Common or Table Salt. It is formed after the reaction between sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid. It is a neutral salt. The pH value of sodium chloride is about 7. Sodium chloride is used to enhance the taste of food. Sodium chloride is used in the manufacturing of many chemicals.

Important chemical from sodium chloride
Sodium Hydroxide (NaOH): Sodium hydroxide is a strong base. It is also known as caustic soda. It is obtained by the electrolytic decomposition of solution of sodium chloride (brine). In the process of electrolytic decomposition of brine (aqueous solution of sodium chloride), brine decomposes to form sodium hydroxide. In this process, chlorine is obtained at anode and hydrogen gas is obtained at cathode as by products. This whole process is known as Chlor – Alkali process.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 31

Use of products after the electrolysis of brine:

Hydrogen gas is used as fuel, margarine, in making of ammonia for fertilizer, etc.
Chlorine gas is used in water treatment, manufacturing of PVC, disinfectants, CFC, pesticides. It is also used in the manufacturing of bleaching powder and hydrochloric acid.
Sodium hydroxide is used for degreasing of metals, manufacturing of paper, soap, detergents, artificial fibres, bleach, etc.
2. Bleaching Powder (CaOCl2): Bleaching powder is also known as chloride of lime. It is a solid and yellowish white in colour. Bleaching powder can be easily identified by the strong smell of chlorine.
When calcium hydroxide (slaked lime) reacts with chlorine, it gives calcium oxychloride (bleaching powder) and water is formed.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 32
Aqueous solution of bleaching powder is basic in nature. The term bleach means removal of colour. Bleaching powder is often used as bleaching agent. It works because of oxidation. Chlorine in the bleaching powder is responsible for bleaching effect.

Use of Bleaching Powder:

Bleaching powder is used as disinfectant to clean water, moss remover, weed killers, etc.
Bleaching powder is used for bleaching of cotton in textile industry, bleaching of wood pulp in paper industry.
Bleaching powder is used as oxidizing agent in many industries, such as textiles industry, paper industry, etc.
3. Baking Soda (NaHCO3): Baking soda is another important product which can be obtained using byproducts of chlor – alkali process. The chemical name of baking soda is sodium hydrogen carbonate (NaHCO3) or sodium bicarbonate. Bread soda, cooking soda, bicarbonate of soda, sodium bicarb, bicarb of soda or simply bicarb, etc. are some other names of baking soda.

Preparation Method: Baking soda is obtained by the reaction of brine with carbon dioxide and ammonia. This is known as Solvay process.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 33
In this process, calcium carbonate is used as the source of CO2 and the resultant calcium oxide is used to recover ammonia from ammonium chloride.

Properties of Sodium Bicarbonate:

Sodium bicarbonate is white crystalline solid, but it appears as fine powder.
Sodium hydrogen carbonate is amphoteric in nature.
Sodium hydrogen carbonate is sparingly soluble in water.
Thermal decomposition of sodium hydrogen carbonate (baking soda).
When baking soda is heated, it decomposes into sodium carbonate, carbon dioxide and water.
2NaHCO3 + heat → Na2CO3 + CO2 + H2O
Sodium carbonate formed after thermal decomposition of sodium hydrogen carbonate decomposes into sodium oxide and carbon dioxide on further heating.
Na2CO3 → Na2O + CO2
This reaction is known as Dehydration reaction.
Use of Baking Soda:

Baking soda is used in making of baking powder, which is used in cooking as it produces carbon dioxide which makes the batter soft and spongy.
Baking soda is used as an antacid.
Baking soda is used in toothpaste which makes the teeth white and plaque free.
Baking soda is used in cleansing of ornaments made of silver.
Since sodium hydrogen carbonate gives carbon dioxide and sodium oxide on strong heating, thus, it, is used as a fire extinguisher.
Baking Powder: Baking powder produces carbon dioxide on heating, so it is used in cooking to make the batter spongy. Although, baking soda also produces carbon dioxide on heating, but it is not used in cooking because on heating, baking soda produces sodium carbonate along with carbon dioxide. The sodium carbonate, thus, produced, makes the taste bitter.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 34
Baking powder is the mixture of baking soda and a mild edible acid. Generally, tartaric acid is mixed with baking soda to make baking powder.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 35
When baking powder is heated, sodium hydrogen carbonate (NaHCO3) decomposes to give CO2 and sodium carbonate (Na2CO3). CO2 causes bread and cake fluffy. Tartaric acid helps to remove bitter taste due to formation of Na2CO3.

4. Washing Soda (Sodium Carbonate)
Preparation Method: Sodium carbonate is manufactured by the thermal decomposition of sodium hydrogen carbonate obtained by Solvay process.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 36
The sodium carbonate obtained in this process is dry. It is called Soda ash or Anhydrous sodium carbonate. Washing soda is obtained by rehydration of anhydrous sodium carbonate.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 37
Since there are 10 water molecules in washing soda, hence, it is known as Sodium Bicarbonate Decahydrate.
Sodium carbonate is a crystalline solid and it is soluble in water when most of the carbonates are insoluble in water.

Use of sodium carbonate:

It is used in the cleaning of cloths, especially in rural areas.
In the making of detergent cake and powder.
In removing the permanent hardness of water.
It is used in glass and paper industries.
The water of Crystallization: Many salts contain water molecule and are known as Hydrated Salts. The water molecule present in salt is known as Water of crystallization.
Examples:
Copper sulphate pentahydrate (CuSO4.5H2O): Blue colour of copper sulphate is due to presence of 5 molecules of water. When copper sulphate is heated, it loses water molecules and turns: into grey – white colour, which is known as anhydrous copper sulphate. After adding water, anhydrous copper sulphate becomes blue again.
Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 38
Acids: Substances which turn blue litmus solution red are called acids. Acids are sour in taste.

Bases: Substances which change red litmus solution blue are called bases. They are bitter in taste.

Mineral Acids: Acids which are obtained from minerals like sulphates, nitrates, chlorides etc. are called mineral acids, example, H2SO4 (Sulphuric acid), HNO3 (Nitric acid) and HCl (Hydrochloric acid).

Organic Acids: Acids which are obtained from plants and animals are called organic acids. Example citric acid, ascorbic acid, tartaric acid, lactic acid, acetic acid.

Hydronium Ions: They are formed by the reaction of H+ (from acid) and H2O. It is because H+ is unstable.

Universal Indicator: A universal indicator is a mixture of indicators which shows a gradual but well-marked series of colour changes over a very wide range of change in concentration of H+ ions.

Strong Acids: Acids which dissociate into ions completely are called strong acids. Example, H2SO4, HCl.

Weak Acids: Acids which do not dissociate into ions completely are called weak acids. Example, citric acid, acetic acid.

Chemical Properties of Acids:

Acids react with active metals to give salt and hydrogen gas.
Acids react with metal carbonates and metal hydrogen carbonates to give salt, water and carbon dioxide.
Acids react with bases to give salt and water. This reaction is called a neutralization reaction.
Acids react with metal oxides to give salt and water.
Chemical Properties of Bases:

Reaction with metals: Certain metals such as zinc, aluminium and tin react with alkali solutions on heating and hydrogen gas is evolved.
Reaction with acids: Bases react with acids to form salt and water.
Indicators: Indicators are substances which indicate the acidic or basic nature of the solution by their colour change.

pH Scale: A scale for measuring hydrogen ion concentration in a solution.
The pH of a solution is defined as the negative logarithm of hydrogen ion concentration in moles per litre.
pH = -log [H+]
pH = -log [H3O+]
where [H+] or [H3O+] represents concentrations of hydrogen ions in a solution.

The pH of a neutral solution is 7.
The pH of an acidic solution is < 7.
The pH of a basic solution is > 7.
Some Important Compounds and their Uses:Acids Bases and Salts Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 2 1

Equations of Acids, Bases and Salts:

Acid + Metal → Salt + Hydrogen gas
H2SO4 + Zn → ZnSO4 + H2
Base + Metal → Salt + Hydrogen gas
2NaOH + Zn → Na2ZnO2 (Sodium zincate) + H2
Base + Acid → Salt + Water
NaOH (aq) + HCl (aq) → NaCl (aq) + H2O (l)
Acids give hydronium ions in water
HCl + H2O → H3O+ + Cl–
Bases generate OH- ions in water
NaOH (aq) + H2O → Na+ (aq) + O– (aq)
Reactions Of Important Chemical Compounds:

Preparation of Bleaching powder: By the action of chlorine on dry slaked lime
Ca(OH)2 + Cl2 → CaOCl2 + H2O
On heating, baking soda liberates CO2

Metals: Physical properties of metals, chemical properties of metals and non-metal oxide.

Metals are the elements that conduct heat and electricity and are malleable and ductile. Examples are Iron (Fe), Aluminium (Al), Silver (Ag), Copper (Cu), Gold (Au), Platinum (Pt), Lead (Pb), Potassium (K), Sodium (Na), Calcium (Ca) and Magnesium (Mg) etc.


 
Metals are the elements which form positive ions by losing electrons. Thus, metals are known as Electropositive Elements.

Physical Properties of Metals

Hardness: Most of the metals are hard, except alkali metals, such as sodium, potassium, lithium, etc. are very soft metals. These can be cut by using a knife.
Strength: Most of the metals are strong and have high tensile strength. Because of this, big structures are made using metals, such as copper (Cu) and iron (Fe). (Except Sodium (Na) and potassium (K) which are soft metals).
State: Metals are solid at room temperature except for mercury (Hg).
Sound: Metals produce ringing sound, so, metals are called Sonorous. Sound of metals is also known as Metallic sound. This is the cause that metal wires are used in making musical instruments.
Conduction: Metals are a good conductor of heat and electricity. This is the cause that electric wires are made of metals like copper and aluminium.
Malleability: Metals are malleable. This means metals can be beaten into a thin sheet. Because of this property, iron is used in making big ships.
Ductility: Metals are ductile. This means metals can be drawn into thin wire. Because of this property, a wire is made of metals.
Melting and Boiling Point: Metals have generally high melting and boiling points. (Except sodium and potassium metals which have low melting and boiling point.)
Density: Most of the metals have a high density.
Colour: Most of the metals are grey in colour. But gold and copper are exceptions.
Chemical Properties of Metals
1. Reaction with oxygen: Most of the metals form respective metal oxides when reacting with oxygen.
Metal + Oxygen → Metal Oxide
Examples:
Reaction of Potassium with Oxygen: Potassium metal forms potassium oxide when reacts with oxygen.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 1

Reaction of Sodium with Oxygen: Sodium metal forms sodium oxide when reacts with oxygen.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 2
Lithium, potassium, sodium, etc. are known as Alkali-metals. Alkali metals react vigorously with oxygen.


 
Reaction of Copper metal with Oxygen: Copper does not react with oxygen at room temperature but when burnt in air, it gives oxide.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 3
Silver, gold and platinum do not combine with the oxygen of air even at high temperature. They are the least reactive.


 
2. Reaction of metals with water: Metals form respective hydroxide and hydrogen gas when reacting with water.
Metal + Water → Metal hydroxide + Hydrogen
Most of the metals do not react with water. However, alkali metals react vigorously with water.

Reaction of Sodium metal with Water: Sodium metal forms sodium hydroxide and liberates hydrogen gas along with lot of heat when reacting with water.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 4

Reaction of Calcium metal with Water: Calcium forms calcium hydroxide along with hydrogen gas and heat when react with water.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 5


 
Reaction of Magnesium metal with Water: Magnesium metal reacts with water slowly and forms magnesium hydroxide and hydrogen gas.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 6

When steam is passed over magnesium metal, magnesium oxide and hydrogen gas are formed.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 7

Reaction of Aluminium metal with Water: Reaction of aluminium metal with cold water is too slow to come into notice. But when steam is passed over aluminium metal, aluminium oxide and hydrogen gas are produced.
2Al + 3H2O → Al2O3 + 2H2


 
Reaction of Zinc metal with Water: Zinc metal produces zinc oxide and hydrogen gas when steam is passed over it. Zinc does not react with cold water.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 8

Reaction of Iron with Water: Reaction of iron with cold water is very slow and comes into notice after a long time. Iron forms rust (iron oxide) when reacts with moisture present in the atmosphere. Iron oxide and hydrogen gas are formed by passing of steam over iron metal.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 9

Both calcium (Ca) and magnesium (Mg) are heavier than water but still float over it: Both calcium and magnesium float over water surface because hydrogen gas is evolved when these metals react with water. It is in the form of bubbles which stick on the metal surface. Therefore, they float over it.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 10
Other metals usually do not react with water or react very slowly. Lead, copper, silver and gold do not react with steam. Thus, the order of reactivity of different metals towards water may be written as :
K > Na > Ca > Mg > Ae > Zn > Fe > Pb > Cu > Ag > Au


 
3. Reaction of metals with dilute acid: Metals form respective salts when reacting with dilute acid.
Metal + dil. acid → Metal salt + Hydrogen

Reaction of Sodium metal with dilute hydrochloric acid: Sodium metal gives sodium chloride and hydrogen gas when react with dilute hydrochloric acid.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 11

Reaction of Magnesium metal with dilute hydrochloric acid: Magnesium chloride and hydrogen gas are formed when magnesium reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 12

Reaction of Zinc with dilute sulphuric acid: Zinc sulphate and hydrogen gas are formed when zinc reacts with dilute sulphuric acid. This method is used in the laboratory to produce hydrogen gas.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 13


 
Hydrogen (H2) gas is not evolved when metal is treated with nitric acid (HNO3):
Nitric acid is strong oxidising agent and it oxidises the hydrogen gas (H2) liberated into water (H2O) and itself get reduced to some oxide of nitrogen like nitrous oxide (N2O)3 nitric oxide (NO) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2).
Copper, gold, silver are known as noble metals. These do not react with water or dilute acids.
The order of reactivity of metal towards dilute hydrochloric acid or sulphuric acid is in the order;
K > Na > Ca > Mg > Al > Zn > Fe > Cu > Hg > Ag

Metal Oxides
Chemical Properties: Metal oxides are basic in nature. The aqueous solution of metal oxides turns red litmus blue.
Reaction of Metal oxides with Water: Most of the metal oxides are insoluble in water. Alkali metal oxides are soluble in water. Alkali metal oxides give strong base when dissolved in water.

Reaction of Sodium oxide with Water: Sodium oxide gives sodium hydroxide when reacts with water.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 14

Reaction of Potassium oxide with Water: Potassium oxide gives potassium hydroxide when reacts with water.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 15

Reaction of Zinc oxide and Aluminium oxide: Aluminium oxide and zinc oxide are insoluble in water. Aluminium oxide and zinc oxide are amphoteric in nature. An amphoteric substance shows both acidic and basic characters. It reacts with base like acid and reacts with an acid like a base.
When zinc oxide reacts with sodium hydroxide, it behaves like an acid. In this reaction, sodium zincate and water are formed.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 16
Zinc oxide behaves like a base when reacts with acid. Zinc oxide gives zinc chloride and water on reaction with hydrochloric acid.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 17
In a similar way, aluminium oxide behaves like a base when reacts with acid and behaves like acid when reacts with a base.
Aluminium oxide gives sodium aluminate along with water when reacts with sodium hydroxide.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 18
Aluminium oxide gives aluminium chloride along with water when it reacts with hydrochloric acid.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 19

Reactivity Series of Metals: The order of intensity or reactivity of metal is known as Reactivity Series. Reactivity of elements decreases on moving from top to bottom in the given reactivity series.
In the reactivity series, copper, gold, and silver are at the bottom and hence, least reactive. These metals are known as Noble metals. Potassium is at the top of the series and hence, most reactive.
Reactivity of some metals are given in descending order :
K > Na > Ca > Mg > Al > Zn > Fe > Pb > Cu
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 20

4. Reaction of metals with solution of other metal salts: Reaction of metals with the solution of other metal salt is displacement reaction. In this reaction, more reactive metal displaces the less reactive metal from its salt.
Metal A + Salt of metal B → Salt of metal A + Metal B
Examples :
Iron displaces copper from copper sulphate solution.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 21
Similarly, aluminium and zinc displace copper from the solution of copper sulphate.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 22
In all the above examples, iron, aluminium and zinc are more reactive than copper. This is why they displace copper from its salt solution.
When copper is dipped in the solution of silver nitrate, it displaces silver and forms copper nitrate.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 23
In the reaction, copper is more reactive than silver and hence, displaces silver from silver nitrate solution.
Silver metal does not react with copper sulphate solution because silver is less reactive than copper and not able to displace copper from its salt solution.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 24
Similarly, when gold is dipped in the solution of copper nitrate, no reaction takes place because copper is more reactive than gold.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 25
In similar way, no reaction takes place when copper is dipped in the solution of aluminium nitrate because copper is less reactive than aluminium.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 26

Non-Metals: Physical Properties of non-metals, chemical properties of non-metals, non¬metal oxides, Reaction of metal and Non-metal, Ionic bonds and formation of an ionic bond. Non-metals are the elements that do not conduct electricity and are neither malleable nor ductile.
Examples: Carbon (C), Sulphur (S), Phosphorous (P), Silicon (Si), Hydrogen (H), Oxygen (O), Nitrogen (N), Chlorine (Cl), Bromine (Br), Neon (Ne) and Argon (Ar) etc.
Non-metals are the elements which form negative ions by gaining an electron. Thus, non¬metals are also known as Electronegative Elements.

Physical properties of non-metals

Hardness: Non-metals are not hard rather they are generally soft. But the diamond is an exception; it is the hardest naturally occurring substance.
State: Non-metals may be solid, liquid or gas.
Lustre: Non-metals have a dull appearance. Diamond and iodine are exceptions.
Sonority: Non-metals are not sonorous, i.e., they do not produce a typical sound on being hit.
Conduction: Non-metals are a bad conductor of heat and electricity. Graphite which is allotrope of carbon is a good conductor of electricity and is an exception.
Malleability and ductility: Non-metals are brittle.
Melting and boiling point: Non-metals have generally low melting and boiling points.
Density: Most of the non-metals have low density.
Colour: Non-metals are in many colours.
Carbon in the form of graphite is non-metal which conduct electricity.

Iodine is non-metal which is lustrous having a shining surface.

Carbon in the form of diamond is a non-metal which is extremely hard.

Diamond is a non-metal which has a very high melting point and boiling point.

Chemical properties of Non-metals
1. Reaction of Non-metals with Oxygen: Non-metals form respective oxide when reacting with oxygen.
Non-metal + Oxygen → Non-metallic oxide
When carbon reacts with oxygen, carbon dioxide is formed along with the production of heat.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 27
When carbon is burnt in an insufficient supply of air, it forms carbon monoxide. Carbon monoxide is a toxic substance. Inhaling of carbon monoxide may prove fatal.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 28
Sulphur gives sulphur dioxide when reacting with oxygen. Sulphur catches fire when exposed to air.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 29
When hydrogen reacts with oxygen it gives water.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 30

Non-metallic Oxide: Non-metallic oxides are acidic in nature. The solution of non-metal oxides turns blue litmus red.
Carbon dioxide gives carbonic acid when dissolved in water.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 31
Sulphur dioxide gives sulphurous acid when dissolved in water.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 32
Sulphur dioxide gives sulphuric acid when reacts with oxygen.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 33

2. Reaction of Non-metal with Chlorine: Non-metal gives respective chloride when they react with chlorine gas.
Non-metal + Chlorine → Non-metal chloride
Hydrogen gives hydrogen chloride and phosphorous gives phosphorous trichloride when reacting with chlorine.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 34

3. Reaction of Non-metals with Hydrogen: Non-metals reactive with hydrogen to form covalent hydrides.
Non-metal + Hydrogen → Covalent Hydride
Sulphur combines with hydrogen to form a covalent hydride is called Hydrogen sulphide.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 35
Nitrogen combines with hydrogen in presence of an iron catalyst to form covalent hydride ammonia.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 36

Non-metals do not react with water (or steam) to evolve Hydrogen gas.

Non-metals do not react with dilute acids.

4. Reaction of Metal and Non-metal: Many metals form ionic bonds when they react with non-metals. Compounds so formed are known as Ionic Compounds.
Ions: Positive or negative charged atoms are known as ions. Ions are formed because of loss or gain of electrons. Atoms form ions obtain by the electronic configuration of the nearest noble gas.
Positive ion: A positive ion is formed because of the loss of electrons by an atom.

Following are some examples of positive ions:
Sodium forms sodium ion because of the loss of one electron. Because of the loss of one electron, one positive charge comes over sodium.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 37
Magnesium forms positive ion because of the loss of two electrons. Two positive charges come over magnesium because of loss of two electrons.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 38

Negative ion: A negative ion is formed because of the gain of an electron.
Some examples are given below :
Chlorine gains one electron in order to achieve a stable configuration. After the loss of one electron, chlorine gets one negative charge over it forming chlorine ion.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 39

Ionic Bonds: Ionic bonds are formed because of transfer of electrons from metal to non¬metal. In this course, metals get positive charge because of transfer of electrons and non-metal gets negative charge because of acceptance of electrons. In other words, bond formed between positive and negative ion is called Ionic Bond.
Since, a compound is electrically neutral, so to form an ionic compound, negative and positive both ions must be combined.

Some examples are given below:
Formation of Sodium Chloride (NaCl): In sodium chloride, sodium is a metal (alkali metal) and chlorine is a non-metal.
Atomic number of sodium = 11
Electronic configuration of sodium : 2, 8, 1
Number of electrons in outermost orbit = 1
Valence electrons = Electrons in outermost orbit = 1
Atomic number of chlorine = 17
Electronic configuration of chlorine : 2, 8, 7
Electrons in outermost orbit = 7
Therefore, valence electrons = ?
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 40
Sodium has one valence electron and chlorine has seven valence electrons. Sodium requires losing one electron to obtain stable configuration and chlorine requires gaining one electron in order to obtain stable electronic configuration. Thus, in order to obtain stable configuration, sodium transfers one electron to chlorine. After loss of one electron, sodium gets one positive charge (+) and chlorine gets one negative charge after gain of one electron. Sodium chloride is formed because of transfer of electrons. Thus, ionic bond is formed between sodium and chlorine. Since, sodium chloride is formed because of ionic bond, thus, it is called Ionic compound. In similar way, potassium chloride (KCl) is formed.

Properties of Ionic compound

Ionic compounds are solid. Ionic bond has a greater force of attraction because of which ions attract each other strongly. This makes ionic compounds solid.
Ionic compounds are brittle.
Ionic compounds have high melting and boiling points because force of attraction between ions of ionic compounds is very strong.
Ionic compounds generally dissolve in water.
Ionic compounds are generally insoluble in organic solvents; like kerosene, petrol, etc.
Ionic compounds do not conduct electricity in the solid state.
The solution of ionic compounds in water conduct electricity. This happens because ions present in the solution of ionic compound facilitate the passage of electricity by moving towards opposite electrodes.
Ionic compounds conduct electricity in the molten state.
Occurrence and Extraction of Metals: Minerals, ores, extraction of metals of least reactivity, extraction of metals of middle reactivity, extraction of metals of high reactivity, refining or purification of metals and corrosion.

Occurrence and Extraction of Metals:
Source of metal: Metals occur in Earth’s crust and in seawater; in the form of ores. Earth’s crust is the major source of metal. Seawater contains many salts such as sodium chloride, magnesium chloride, etc.

Mineral: Minerals are naturally occurring substances which have a uniform composition.

Ores: The minerals from which a metal can be profitably extracted are called Ores.
Metals found at the bottom of reactivity series are least reactive and they are often found in nature in free-state; such as gold, silver, copper, etc. Copper and silver are also found in the form of sulphide and oxide ores.

Metals found in the middle of reactivity series, such as Zn, Fe, Pb, etc. are usually found in the form of oxides, sulphides or carbonates.
Metals found at the top of the reactivity series are never found in free-state as they are very reactive, example; K, Na, Ca, Mg and Al, etc.
Many metals are found in the form of oxides because oxygen is abundant in nature and is very reactive.

Extraction of Metals: Metals can be categorised into three parts on the basis of their reactivity: Most reactive, medium reactive and least reactive.
The three major steps involved in the extraction of a metal from its ore are

Concentration or enrichment of ores.
Conversion of concentrated ore into crude metal and,
Refining of impure or crude metal.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 41

1. Concentration of Ores: Removal of impurities, such as soil, sand, stone, silicates, etc. from mines ore is known as Concentration of Ores.
Ores which are mined often contain many impurities. These impurities are called gangue. First of all, concentration is done to remove impurities from ores. The concentration of ores is also known as enrichment of ores. Process of concentration depends upon physical and chemical properties of ores. Gravity separation, electromagnetic separation, froth flotation process, etc. are some examples of the processes which are applied for concentration of ores.

2. Conversion of Concentrated Ore into Crude Metal
Conversion of metals ores into oxides: It is easy to obtain metals from their oxides. So, ores found in the form of sulphide and carbonates are first converted to their oxides by the process of roasting and calcination. Oxides of metals so obtained are converted into metals by the process of reduction.

Roasting: Heating of sulphide ores in the presence of excess air to convert them into oxides is known as Roasting.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 42

Calcination: Heating of carbonate ores in the limited supply of air to convert them into oxides is known as Calcination.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 43

Calcination	Roasting
(i) It is done for carbonate ores.	(i) It is done for sulphide ores.
(ii) Carbonates ores heated in the absence of oxygen.	(ii) Sulphide ores are heated in the Presence of oxygen.
(iii) The CO2 gas is released and Metal oxide is obtained.
ZnCO3(s) heat−→− ZnO(s) + CO2(g)	(iii) SO2 gas is released and Metal oxide is obtained.
2ZnS(s) + 3O2(g) heat−→− 2ZnO(s) + 2SO2(g)
3. Reduction: Heating of oxides of metals to turn them into metal is known as Reduction.
(i) Extraction of Metals of Least Reactivity: Mercury and copper, which belong to the least reactivity series, are often found in the form of their sulphide ores. Cinnabar (HgS) is the ore of mercury. Copper glance (Cu2S) is the ore of copper.
Extraction of Mercury Metal: Cinnabar (HgS) is first heated in air. This turns HgS (mercury sulphide or cinnabar) into HgO (mercury oxide) by liberation of sulphur dioxide. Mercury oxide so obtained is again heated strongly. This reduces mercury oxide to mercury metal.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 44

Extraction of Copper Metal: Copper glance (Cu2S) is roasted in the presence of air. Roasting turns copper glance (ore of copper) into copper (l) oxide. Copper oxide is then heated in the absence of air. This reduces copper (l) oxide into copper metal.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 45

(ii) Extraction of Metals of Middle Reactivity: Iron, zinc, lead, etc. are found in the form of carbonate or sulphide ores. Carbonate or sulphide ores of metals are first converted into respective oxides and then oxides are reduced to respective metals.

Extraction of Zinc: Zinc blende (ZnS: zinc sulphide) and smithsonite or zinc spar or calamine (ZnCO3: zinc carbonate) are ores of zinc. Zinc blende is roasted to be converted into zinc oxide. Zinc spar is put under calcination to be converted into zinc oxide.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 46
Zinc oxide so obtained is reduced to zinc metal by heating with carbon (a reducing agent).
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 47

Extraction of Iron from Haematite (Fe2O3): Haematite ore is heated with carbon to be reduced to iron metal.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 48

Extraction of Lead from Lead oxide: Lead oxide is heated with carbon to be reduced to lead metal.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 49

Reduction of Metal oxide by Heating with Aluminium: Metal oxides are heated with aluminium (a reducing agent) to be reduced to metal. Following is an example: Manganese dioxide and copper oxide are reduced to respective metals when heated with aluminium.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 50

Thermite Reaction: Ferric oxide; when heated with aluminium; is reduced to iron metal. In this reaction, a lot of heat is produced. The thermite reaction is used in the welding of electric conductors, iron joints, etc. such as joints in railway tracks. This is also known as Thermite Welding (TW).
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 51

(iii) Extraction of Metals of High Reactivity: Metals of high reactivity; such as sodium, calcium, magnesium, aluminium, etc. are extracted from their ores by electrolytic reduction. These metals cannot be reduced using carbon because carbon is less reactive than them.
Electrolytic Reduction: Electric current is passed through the molten state of metal ores. Metal being positively charged is deposited over the cathode.
Example: When an electric current is passed through molten state or solution of sodium chloride, sodium metal gets deposited over the cathode.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 52
Metals obtained from the process of electrolytic reduction are pure in form.

4. Refining or purification of metals: Metals extracted from various methods contains some impurities, thus, they are required to be refined. Most of the metals are refined using electrolytic refining.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 53
Electrolytic Refining: In the process of electrolytic refining, a lump of impure metal and a thin strip of pure metal are dipped in the salt solution of metal to be refined. When an electric current is passed through the solution, pure metal is deposited over a thin strip of pure metal
from a lump of impure metal. In this, impure metal is used as anode and pure metal is used as a cathode.
Electrolytic Refining of Copper: A lump of impure copper metal and a thin strip of pure copper are dipped in the solution of copper sulphate. Impure lump of metal is connected with the positive pole and thin strip of pure metal is connected with negative pole. When electric current is passed through the solution, pure metal from anode moves towards cathode and is deposited over it. Impurities present in metal are settled near the bottom of anode in the solution. Settled impurities in the solution are called Anode Mud.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 54

5. Corrosion: Most of the metals keep on reacting with the atmospheric air. This leads to the formation of a layer over the metal. In the long run, the underlying layer of metal keeps on getting lost due to conversion into oxides or sulphides or carbonate, etc. As a result, the metal gets eaten up. The process is called Corrosion.

Rusting of Iron: Rusting of iron is the most common form of corrosion. When iron articles like the gate, grill, fencing, etc. come in contact with moisture present in the air, the upper layer of iron turns into iron oxide. Iron oxide is brown-red in colour and is known as Rust. The phenomenon is called Rusting of Iron.
If rusting is not prevented in time, the whole iron article would turn into iron oxide. This is also known as Corrosion of Iron. Rusting of iron gives a huge loss every year.

Prevention of Rusting: For rusting, iron must come in contact with oxygen and water. Rusting is prevented by preventing the reaction between atmospheric moisture and the iron article. This can be done by:

Painting
Greasing
Galvanization
Electroplating
Alloying
6. Alloys: The homogeneous mixture of two or more metals, or a metal and a non-metal is called Alloy.
Types of alloys :

Ferrous alloys: An alloy in which iron (Fe) is present. For example : manganese steel (Fe = 86% ; Mn = 13% ; C = 1%) and Nickle steel (Fe = 98% ; Ni = 2%).
Non-ferrous alloys: An alloy does not contain iron. For example : Brass (Cu = 80% ; Zn = 20%), and Bronze (Cu = 90% ; Sn = 10%).
Amalgams: An alloy in which mercury (Hg) is present. For example Sodium amalgams [Na(Hg)] and Zinc amalgams [Zn(Hg)].
Properties of an Alloy

Alloys are stronger than the metal from which they are obtained.
It is harder than the constituent metals.
More resistance to corrosion.
The melting point of alloys is lower than the constituent metals.
Example: Solder [Sn(80%) + Pb(50%)] has lower m. p. than Pb and Sn.
The electrical conductivity of alloys is lower than the constituent metals.
Some examples of Alloys:

Brass: [80% Cu + 20% Zn ]
Bronze: [90% Cu + 20% Sn]
Solder: [50% Pb + 50% Sn]
Duralumin: [95% Al + 4% Cu + 0.5% Mg + 0.5 Mn]
Steel: [99.95% Fe + 0.05% C]
Stainless steel: [74% Fe + 18% Cr + 8% Ni]
Magnesium: [95% Al + 5% Mg]
German Silver: [60% Cu + 20% Zn + 20% Ni]
Alloys of Gold: Pure gold is said to be of 24 carats. Gold is alloyed with a small amount of silver or copper to make it hard.
Metals and Non-metals:

Metals	Non-metals
1. Metals generally occur as hard solid substances.	1. Non-metals generally occur in all the three forms of matter- solid, liquid and gases.
2. Metals are malleable and ductile.	2. Non-metals are non-malleable and non-ductile.
3. Metals produce ringing sound on striking which is called their sonorous property.	3. Non-metals do not show this sonorous property.
4. Metals are good conductors of heat and electricity.	4. Non-metals are poor conductors of heat and electricity with the exception of graphite which is a good conductor of heat and electricity.
Chemical Properties of Metals and Non-metals.
The reaction of metals with oxygen. Metals form their oxides when reacting with oxygen.
Metal + Oxygen → Metal oxide
Metal oxides are basic in nature. Example, Reaction of Iron metal with oxygen When iron reacts with moist air, it forms rust.

Rust is iron oxide. Articles made of iron, such as grills, fencing, etc. are getting rusted because of reaction with moist air.
Iron (Fe) + Water (H2O) + Oxygen (O2) → Fe3O4n.H2O (Iron II, III) Oxide (Rust)
Rust is reddish brown in colour and is iron oxide. Iron oxide is basic in nature. It turns red litmus blue.

Rusting of iron can be prevented:

by galvanizing the iron articles with zinc coating.
by painting and applying grease on the articles.
The reaction of Magnesium metal with oxygen: When magnesium is burnt in air, it forms magnesium oxide. Burning in the air means reaction with oxygen.
Magnesium + Oxygen (O2) → MgO (Magnesium oxide)

Magnesium oxide forms magnesium hydroxide with water. The solution of Magnesium oxide turns red litmus paper blue. This means magnesium oxide is basic in nature.
MgO + H2O → Mg(OH)2 (Magnesium Hydroxide)

The reaction of Non-metals with oxygen: Non-metals form their oxides when they react with oxygen.
Non-metal + Oxygen → Non-metal oxide
Non-metal oxides are acidic in nature.
Example., Reaction of sulphur with oxygen.

When sulphur is burnt in air, it forms sulphur dioxide.
Sulphur + Oxygen (O2) → SO2 (Sulphur dioxide)

The solution of sulphur dioxide turns blue litmus paper red. Sulphur dioxide forms sulphurous acid when dissolved in water. Thus, sulphur dioxide is acidic in nature.
SO2 + H2O → Sulphurous acid (H2SO3)

The reaction of carbon with oxygen—When carbon is burnt in air, it forms carbon dioxide.
Carbon + Oxygen (O2) → CO2 (Carbon dioxide)

You can observe that when coal (carbon) is burnt it forms smoke, which contains carbon dioxide. Carbon dioxide is acidic in nature. The solution of carbon dioxide in water turns blue litmus paper red.
CO2 + H2O → Carbonic acid (H2CO3)

The reaction of Metals and Non-metals with water: Generally, metals form respective hydroxides when they react with water.
Metal + Water → Metal hydroxide
The reaction of sodium metal with water: Sodium metal vigorously reacts with water and forms sodium hydroxide along with a lot of heat.
Na + H2O → NaOH (Sodium hydroxide) + H2 (Hydrogen) + Heat

Non-metals generally do not react with water. Rather some non-metals which react with air vigorously are stored in water. The reaction of metals and non-metals with dilute acid. Metals give hydrogen gas when they react with dilute acid.
Metal + Acid → Hydrogen gas + Salt

The reaction of zinc with dilute acid. Zinc gives hydrogen gas along with zinc chloride when it reacts with hydrochloric acid. Similarly, zinc gives hydrogen gas along with zinc sulphate when it reacts with sulphuric acid. This method is used to produce hydrogen gas in the laboratory.
Zn + H2SO4 (Sulphuric acid) → ZnSO4 (Zinc sulphate) + H2 (Hydrogen)

The reaction of Aluminium with dilute acid. Aluminium gives hydrogen gas along with aluminium chloride when it reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid.
2Al + 6HCl (Hydrochloric acid) → 2AlCl3 (Aluminium Chloride) + 3H2 (Hydrogen)

Copper does not react with dilute sulphuric acid even on heating, but it reacts with concentrated sulphuric acid. Copper, silver and gold are considered as noble metals as do not react with dilute acid.
Generally, non-metals do not react with dilute acid.

The reaction of metals and non-metals with the base. Metals give hydrogen gas when they react with a base.
Metal + Base → Hydrogen gas + Salt
The reaction of aluminium metal with sodium hydroxide.
Al + NaOH (Sodium hydroxide) → NaAlO2 (Sodium aluminate) + H2 (Hydrogen)
Aluminium metal forms hydrogen gas and sodium aluminate when it reacts with sodium hydroxide. Similarly, zinc gives sodium zincate and hydrogen gas when it reacts with sodium hydroxide.

Displacement Reaction: When a more reactive metal reacts with the salt solution of less reactive metal, more reactive metal displaces the less reactive metal from its solution.
Metal A + Salt Solution of metal B → Salt Solution of metal A + metal B
In the above equation, metal A is more reactive than metal B.
Example., When aluminium metal is dipped in the solution of copper sulphate, it forms aluminium sulphate and copper.
Al + CuSO4 (Copper sulphate) → Al2(SO4)3 (Aluminium Sulphate) + Cu (Copper)
In the above reaction, aluminium is more reactive than copper, that is why it replaces copper from the solution of copper sulphate.

When copper metal is dipped in the solution of aluminium nitrate, no reaction takes place. Because copper is less reactive than aluminium.
Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 1

Roasting and Calcination:

Roasting	Calcination
1. It is done in case of sulphide ores.	1. It is done in case of carbonate ores.
2. In this, the ore is heated in the presence of air to convert it into oxide compound.	2. The carbonate ore is heated in the absence of air to convert into oxide.
3. The gas given out is SO2 (sulphur dioxide) gas.	3. The gas given out is CO2 (carbon dioxide) gas.
4. Example: Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 2	4. Example:Metals and Non-metals Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 3 3

Bonding in Carbon: The Covalent bond, Electron dot structure, Physical properties of organic compounds, Allotropes of Carbon.

Covalent Bond: The atomic number of carbon is 6. Its electronic configuration is 2, 4. It requires, 4 electrons to achieve the inert gas electronic configuration. But carbon cannot form an ionic bond


 
It could gain four electrons forming C4- cation. But it would be difficult for the nucleus with six protons to hold on to ten electrons.

It could lose four electrons forming C4+ cations. But it requires a large amount of energy to remove four electrons.


 
Thus, carbon overcomes this problem by sharing of its valence electrons with other carbon atoms or with atoms of other elements.

The bond formed by mutual sharing of electron pairs between two atoms in a molecule is known as Covalent Bond.

Types of Covalent Bond:

Single Covalent Bond: When a single pair of electrons are shared between two atoms in a molecule. For example; F2, Cl2, H2 etc.
Double Covalent Bond: When two pairs of electrons are shared between two atoms in a molecule. For example; O2, CO2 etc.
Triple Covalent Bond: When three pairs of electrons are shared between two atoms in a molecule. For example; N2 etc.
Electron Dot Structure: The electron dot structures provides a picture of bonding in molecules in terms of the shared pairs of electrons and octet rule.

Formation of Hydrogen Molecule
Atomic number of Hydrogen = 1
Number of valence electrons = 1
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 1


 
Formation of CH4 Molecule
Atomic number of Carbon = 6 [2, 4]
Number of valence electrons = 4
Atomic number of Hydrogen = 1
Number of valence electrons = 1
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 2


 
Formation of CO2 Molecule
Atomic number of Carbon = 6 [2, 4]
Number of valence electrons = 4
Atomic number of Oxygen = 8 [2, 6]
Number of valence electrons = 6
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 3

Formation of H2S Molecule
Atomic number of Sulphur = 16 [2, 8, 6]
Number of valence electrons = 6
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 4


 
Physical Properties of Organic Compounds
Most of the organic compounds have low boiling and melting point, due to the weak force of attraction (i.e., the inter-molecular force of attraction) between these molecules.
Most carbon compounds are poor conductors of electricity, due to the absence of free electrons and free ions.

Compounds	M.P. (K)	B.P. (K)
Acetic acid (CH3COOH)	290	391
Chloroform (CHCl3)	209	334
Ethanol (CH3CH2OH)	156	351
Methane (CH4)	90	111
Allotropes of Carbon
Allotropy: The phenomenon in which the element exists in two or more different physical states with similar chemical properties are called Allotropy.

Carbon has Three Main Allotropes

Diamond: In this, carbon, an atom is bonded to four other atoms of carbon forming three-dimensional structures. It is the hardest substance and an insulator. It is used for drilling rocks and cutting. It is also used for making jewellery.
Graphite: In this, each carbon atom is bonded to three other carbon atoms. It is a good conductor of electricity and used as a lubricant.
Buckminster Fullerene: It is an allotrope of the carbon-containing cluster of 60 carbon atoms joined together to form spherical molecules. It is dark solid at room temperature.
Versatile nature of Carbon, Hydrocarbons, Isomerism, Homologous series, Functional groups, Nomenclature of functional groups.

Versatile Nature of Carbon: The existence of such a large number of organic compounds is due to the following nature of carbon,

Catenation
Tetravalent nature.
(i) Catenation: The self linking property of an element mainly carbon atom through covalent bonds to form long straight, branched and rings of different sizes are called Catenation.
This property is due to

The small size of the carbon atom.
The great strength of the carbon-carbon bond.
Carbon can also form stable multiple bonds (double or triple) with itself and with the atoms of other elements.
Straight Chain
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 5
Branched Chain
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 6
Rings
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 7

(ii) Tetravalent Nature: Carbon has valency of four. It is capable of bonding with four other atoms of carbon or some other heteroatoms with single covalent bond as well as double or triple bond.
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 8


 
Hydrocarbons: Compounds of carbon and hydrogen are known as hydrocarbons.
For example; Methane (CH4), Ethane (C2H6), Ethene (C2H4), Ethyne (C2H2) etc.
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 9

Saturated Hydrocarbon (Alkanes): General formula is CnH2n+2.
n = number of carbon atoms.
In this, the carbon atoms are connected by only a single bond.
For example; Methane (CH4), Ethane (C2H6) etc.
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 10


 
Unsaturated Hydrocarbons
Alkenes: General formula is CnH2n, where n = number of carbon atoms.
In this, the two carbon atoms are connected by double bond.
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 11

Alkynes: General formula is CnH2n-2, where n = number of carbon atoms. In this, the two carbon atoms are connected by triple bond.
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 12

Electron Dot Structure of Hydrocarbons
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 13

Isomerism: Compounds having the same molecular formula but different structural formula and properties are known as Isomers and this phenomenon is known as Isomerism.

Structural Isomerism: Compounds having the same molecular formula but different structures are called Structural isomers. Example: Isomers of butane (C4H10)
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 14
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 15

Homologous Series: Series of organic compounds having the same functional group and chemical properties and successive members differ by a CH2 unit or 14 mass units are known as Homologous series.

Homologous series of Alkanes, Alkenes and Alkynes
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 16

Characteristic of Homologous Series

The successive members in homologous series differ by CH2 unit or 14 mass unit.
Members of given homologous series have the same functional group.
All the members of homologous series shows similar chemical properties.
Functional Group: An atom or group of atoms present in a molecule which largely determines its chemical properties are called Functional Group.
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 17
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 18

Nomenclature of Organic Compounds: It is difficult to remember millions of compounds by their individual common name. Thus, to systematize the nomenclature of organic compounds IUPAC (International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry) has given certain rule which is as follows:
1. Identify the Number of Carbon Atoms in the Compound

S. No	Number of Carbon Atoms	Word Root (-) (Suffix)	Single bond
1.	One carbon atoms (1-C)	Meth	+ ane
2.	Two carbon atoms (2-C)	Eth	+ ane
3.	Three carbon atoms (3-C)	Prop	+ ane
4.	Four carbon atoms (4-C)	But	+ ane
5.	Five carbon atoms (5-C)	Pent	+ ane
6.	Six carbon atoms (6-C)	Hex	+ ane
2. Identify the functional group

S. No.	Functional Group	Prefix	Suffix
1.	Double bond (=)	—	ene
2.	Triple bond (≡)	—	yne
3.	Chlorine (—Cl)	Chloro	—
4.	Bromine (—Br)	Bromo	—
5.	Alcohol (-OH)	—	ol
6.	Aldehyde (-CHO)	—	al
7.	Ketone (-CO-)	—	one
8.	Carboxylic acid (-COOH)	—	oic acid
3. Name the Compounds By Following Order
Prefix + Word Root + Suffix
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 19
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 20

Chemical Properties of Carbon Compounds: The important chemical properties are as follows:
1. Combustion: The complete combustion of carbon compounds in the air gives carbon dioxide water, heat and light.
CH3CH2OH(l) + O2(g) → CO2(g) + H2O(l) + Heat and light

Carbon burns in air or oxygen to give carbon dioxide and heat and light.
C(s) + O2(g) → CO2(g) + Heat and light

Saturated hydrocarbons burn with a blue flame in the presence of a sufficient supply of air or oxygen.
CH4(g) + 2O2(g) → CO2(g) + 2H2O(l) + Heat and light

In presence of limited supply of air, saturated hydrocarbon forms a sooty flame.

Unsaturated hydrocarbons burn with a yellow smoky flame.

The gas and kerosene stove used at home has inlet for air so that, burnt to given clean blue flame.
Due to presence of small amount of nitrogen and sulphur, coal and petroleum produces carbon dioxide with oxides of nitrogen and sulphur which are major pollutant.

2. Oxidation: Oxidation of ethanol in presence of oxidizing agents gives ethanoic acid.
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 21

Oxidizing Agent: Some substances are capable of adding oxygen to others, are known as Oxidising Agent.
Example: Alkaline KMnO4 (or KMnO4—KOH)
Acidified K2Cr2O7 (or K2Cr2O7—H2SO4)
KMnO4 – Potassium permanganate
K2Cr2O7 – Potassium dichromate

3. Addition Reaction: Addition of dihydrogen with unsaturated hydrocarbon in the presence of catalysts such as nickel or platinum or palladium are known as Hydrogenation (addition) reaction.
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 22

Catalyst: Substances that cause a reaction to occur or proceeds to different rate without consuming in it are called a catalyst. For example; Ni, Pt, Pd, etc.

Process of converting vegetable oil into solid fat (vegetable ghee) is called Hydrogenation of Oil.
Vegetable oil + H2 Undefined control sequence \xrightarrow  Vegetable ghee

Vegetable fats are saturated fats which are harmful for health.

Vegetable oil containing unsaturated fatty acids are good for health.

4. Substitution Reaction: Replacement of one or more hydrogen atom of an organic molecule by another atom or group of the atom is known as Substitution Reaction.
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 23

Some Important Carbon Compounds :
Ethanol (CH3CH2—OH): Commonly known as Ethyl Alcohol.
Physical Properties

It is colourless, inflammable liquid.
It is miscible with water in all proportions.
It has no effect on the litmus paper.
Chemical Properties

Reaction with sodium
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 24
Reaction with concentrated H2SO4 (Dehydration Reaction)
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 25
Dehydrating agent: Substances which removes water from ethanol (alcohols) is known as Dehydrating agent. For example; Cone. H2SO4.
Uses: As solvent, as antiseptic (tincture iodine), as anti-freeze in automobiles.

Ethanoic Acid (CH3COOH): Commonly known as Acetic acid. 5-8% of ethanoic acid in water is called Vinegar. The melting point of pure ethanoic acid is 290 K and hence, it often freezes in cold climate so named as glacial acetic acid.

Physical Properties

It is a colourless, pungent-smelling liquid.
Miscible with water in all proportions.
Turns blue litmus to red.
Chemical Properties
(i) Esterification Reaction: Reaction of ethanoic acid with an alcohol in the presence of a few drops of conc. H2SO4 as catalyst gives a sweet-smelling substance known as Esters, called Esterification reaction.
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 26
Esters are used in making perfumes and flavouring agents.

Saponification Reaction: Reaction of esters with sodium hydroxide, gives alcohol and sodium salt of carboxylic acid (soap). This reaction is known as Saponification Reaction.
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 27

(ii) Reaction with Carbonates and Hydrogen Carbonates: Ethanoic acid reacts with sodium carbonates and sodium hydrogen carbonates to give rise to a salt, carbon dioxide and water.
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 28

Used as vinegar.
Used as raw material for the preparation of acetyl chloride and esters.
Soap: Sodium or potassium salts of long chain fatty acids is called Soap.
General formula: RCOO–Na+

Detergent: Ammonium and sulphonate salts of long chain fatty acids are called Detergent.
Example: CH3—(CH2)11—C6H4—SO3Na.

Hard and Soft Water: Water that does not produce lather with soap readily is called Hard water and which produces lather with soap is called Soft Water.
Hardness of water is due to the presence of bicarbonates, chlorides and sulphate salt of calcium and magnesium.

Difference between soaps and detergents

Soaps	Detergents
(i) These are sodium or potassium salts of long chain fatty acids.	(i) These are ammonium and sulphonate salts of long chain fatty acids.
(ii) Ionic part of the soap is —COO–Na+	(ii) Ionic part of detergent is —OSO3-Na+.
(iii) Their efficiency decreases in hard water	(iii) Their efficiency is unaffected in hard water.
(iv) Soaps are biodegradable.	(iv) Detergents are non-biodegradable.
Advantage of Detergents: The main advantage of detergent over soaps is that soaps cannot be used in hard water for washing because hard water reacts with soap to form curdy white precipitate called Scum.
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 29
Thus, in hard water, soap does not give lather while detergent does.

Cleansing Action of Soaps and Detergents: Both soaps and detergents cantains two parts. A long hydrocarbon part which is hydrophobic (water repelling) in nature and a short ionic part which is hydrophillic (water attracting) in nature.
The hydrocarbon part of the soap molecule links itself to the oily (dirt) drop and ionic end orients itself towards water and forms a spherical structure called micelles. The soap micelles helps in dissolving the dirt in water and wash our clothes.
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 30
Covalent Bond: A chemical bond formed between two atoms by sharing of valence electrons between two atoms so that each atom acquires the stable electronic configuration of the nearest noble gas.

Covalency: The number of electrons contributed by each atom for sharing.

Carbon always forms a covalent bond: Atomic no of carbon is 6. So, its configuration is K-2, L-4. Therefore, it should either lose or gain 4 electrons to achieve the noble gas configuration and become stable.
However, it is difficult for carbon to gain or lose four electrons because of the following reasons:

It cannot gain 4 electrons to form C4- ion having Neon gas (2, 8) configuration because this anion would be highly unstable due to a large amount of energy required to overcome the forces of repulsion between the four electrons being added and the six electrons already present in the carbon atom.
It cannot lose 4 electrons to form C4+ ion having Helium gas (2) configuration because this cation would be highly unstable due to a large amount of energy required to remove four electrons from the carbon atom.
Tetravalency of Carbon: A carbon atom has four electrons in the valence shell. Therefore, carbon forms four covalent bonds, i.e., carbon is tetravalent.

Allotropic forms of Carbon: The phenomenon of existence of an element in two or more forms which have different physical properties but identical chemical properties is called allotropy.
Three allotropic forms of carbon:

Diamond
Graphite
Fullerenes
Hydrocarbon: Organic compounds of carbon and hydrogen are called hydrocarbons.

Saturated Compound: Compounds of carbon which have only single bonds between the carbon atoms are called saturated compounds e.g., Ethane, Propane, Butane etc.

Unsaturated Compound: Compounds of carbon which contain one or more double or triple bonds between carbon atoms are called unsaturated compounds
e.g., Ethene, Propene, Butyne, etc.

Alkanes

General formula – CnH2n+2
Saturated hydrocarbons
Methane – CH4
Ethane – C2H6
Alkenes

General formula – CnH2n
Unsaturated hydrocarbon.
Ethene – C2H4
Propene – C3H6
Homologous series: A family of organic compounds having the same functional group, similar chemical properties and the successive (adjacent) members differ by a CH2 unit or 14 mass unit.

Characteristics of a homologous series:
All the members of a homologous series can be represented by a general formula.

Alkane – CnH2n+2
Alkyne – CnH2n-2
Alcohol – CnH2n+1OH
Ketone – CnH2n+1COCnH2n+1
Alkene – CnH2n
Haloalkane – CnH2n+1X
Aldehyde – CnH2n+1CHO
Carboxylic acid – CnH2n+1COOH
The molecular formula of two successive (adjacent) members of a homologous series differs by a CH2 unit.
The molecular masses of any two successive members of a homologous series differ by 14 u.
All the members of a given homologous series have the same functional group.
All the members of a series show similar chemical properties.
The members of a homologous series show a gradation in physical properties.

Nomenclature of carbon compound: International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) decided some rules to name the carbon compounds. This was done to maintain uniformity throughout the world. Names which are given on this basis are popularly known as IUPAC name. The rules for nomenclature are as follows:
(i) Identify the number of carbon atoms in the carbon compound. Name the carbon compounds according to the number of carbon atoms.
Example, Saturated hydrocarbon having one carbon atom is named as Methane. Saturated hydrocarbon having two carbon atoms is named as Ethane.

An unsaturated hydrocarbon with a double bond having two carbon atoms is named as Ethene.
An unsaturated hydrocarbon with a triple bond between carbon atoms is named as Ethyne.
(ii) If the structure has a branched chain, identify the longest chain and then identify the number of carbon atoms.

(iii) In the case of a functional group present, write the prefix or suffix of the functional group as given below. Then write the name of the parent compound:
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 1

Chemical properties of Ethanol

Ethanol (C2H5OH) compound is a colourless liquid at room temperature. It is the second member of the homologous series of alcohols. Its common name is ethyl alcohol. Its functional group is – OH.
It has a very low melting point (156 K) and low boiling point (351 K or 78°C).
Ethanol is highly soluble in water.
Ethanol is one of the main components of alcoholic drinks.
It is a good organic solvent.
It is a neutral substance, so it does not have any effect on either blue litmus solution or red litmus solution.
It bums with a blue flame in the presence of O2 of air. This combustion is an oxidation process.
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 2
In the presence of alkaline KMnO4, it is oxidised to ethanoic acid.
carbon and its compounds notes
Ethanol alcohol reacts with sodium(Na) metal vigorously to form sodium ethoxide and evolves H2 gas.
2C2H5OH + 2Na → 2C2H5ONa (Sodium ethoxide) + H2 (g)
Ethanol on dehydration in the presence of cone. H2SO4 acid at 443 K forms ethene gas. H2SO4 acid absorbs water molecules from the alcohol molecules and acts as a strong dehydrating agent.
class 10 chemistry chapter 4 notes
Chemical properties of Ethanoic acid

Ethanoic acid commonly called acetic acid (CH3COOH) is a colourless liquid. The functional group present in it is carboxylic acid – COOH.
It’s melting point is 290 K and the boiling point is 391 K.
Being an acid, it turns blue litmus red.
It is sour in taste.
Ethanoic acid reacts with alcohols in the presence of cone. H2SO4 acid to form sweet smelling compounds called esters.
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 5
Ethanoic acid reacts with bases to form its salt and water.
carbon and its compounds class 10 notes pdf
It reacts with carbonate and hydrogen-carbonate compounds of metals to form its salt (sodium ethanoate commonly called sodium acetate) and release CO2 gas.
Carbon and its Compounds Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 4 7
Cleansing action of soap: The dirt is generally held to the surface of a dirty cloth by a thin film of oil or grease.
When a dirty cloth is treated with soap or detergent solution, the non- polar tail of the soap or the detergent dissolve in oil or grease while the polar heads are held by the surrounding water. Soap or detergent micelle is formed with the oily or greasy dirt lying at their Centre (Soap or detergent is attracted both by the greasy dirt and water.
chapter 4 science class 10 notes
When the surface of the cloth is mechanically scrubbed or beaten on a stone or with a wooden paddle or agitated in a washing machine, the loosened oily particle is removed from the dirty surface and the cloth is cleaned. Detergents lower the surface tension of water to a greater extent than soap, therefore the cleansing action of detergent is much higher than those of soaps.

1. The earth’s crust has only 0.02% carbon in the form of minerals (like carbonates^bicarbonates, coal, and petroleum).

2. The atmosphere has 0.03% of carbon dioxide.

3. In spite of its small amount available in nature, carbon is a versatile element as it forms the basis for all living organisms and many things which we use.

4. Bonding in carbon :

The atomic number of carbon = 6
An electronic configuration has 2 electrons in K shell and 4 electrons in L shell.
In order to attain the noble gas configuration, carbon should either gain 4 electrons or lose 4 electrons or can share it’s 4 electrons with some other element.
The gain of 4 electrons (to form an octet, i.e., 8 electrons in C4- anion) is difficult because then a nucleus with 6 protons will have to hold extra four electrons.
Loss of 4 electrons (to attain duplet, i.e., 2 electrons like He atom in C4+ cation) is difficult as it requires a large amount of energy to remove four electrons.
Carbon, hence, overcomes this difficulty by sharing it’s four valence electrons with other atoms of carbon or with atoms of other elements. These electrons contributed by the atoms for mutual sharing in order to acquire the stable noble gas configuration is called covalency of that atom. Hence, carbon shows TETRACOVALENCY.
The simplest molecule formed by sharing of electrons (i.e., covalent bonds), can be represented by electron dot structure.
carbon-compounds-cbse-notes-class-10-science-1
5. Allotropes of carbon: The phenomenon by means of which an element can exist in two or more forms, with similar chemical properties but different physical properties are called allotropy and the different forms are called allotropes. Carbon shows three allotropic forms :
carbon-compounds-cbse-notes-class-10-science-2
Note:

Diamond is the hardest substance whereas graphite is very soft.
Diamond is used for grinding and polishing of ‘ hard materials and graphite is used as a lubricant.
Diamond has a three-dimensional rigid structure but graphite has a hexagonal sheet layer structure.
Diamond is a bad conductor of electricity but graphite is a very good conductor of electricity.
6. Fullerenes: A new category of carbon allotrope, fullerenes are spherical in shape or a soccer ball like. The first fullerene identified was C-60 with 60 carbon atoms arranged like the geodesic dome designed by US architect, Buckminster Fuller, hence these are also known as Buckminster Fullerenes or Bucky Ball structures.

7. Cause of versatile nature of carbon: Four main reasons for the versatile nature of carbon are:
(a) Catenation: It is the unique property of self-linkage of carbon atoms by means of covalent bonds to form straight chains, or branched chains, or the rings of different sizes (as shown below):
carbon-compounds-cbse-notes-class-10-science-3
carbon-compounds-cbse-notes-class-10-science-4
(b) Tetracovalency: Due to small size, and presence of four valence electrons, carbon can form strong bonds with other carbon atoms, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, or sulphur, etc. For example, compounds of carbon with hydrogen are called hydrocarbons.

(c) Multiple Bond Formation : Small size of carbon also enables it to form multiple bonds, (i.e., double bonds or triple bonds) with other elements as well as with its own atoms. This increases the number of carbon compounds.
Note:

Compounds of carbon with double bonds and triple bonds are called as unsaturated compounds while those with carbon-carbon single bonds are called saturated compounds.
Alkenes (with —C = C —) and Alkynes (with —C = C—) are hence unsaturated, whereas Alkanes (with — C — C—) are saturated compounds.
(d) Isomerism: The phenomenon by means of which the carbon compounds with same molecular formula show different structures, and properties, e.g., A chain of 4 carbon atoms can be written in two ways :
carbon-compounds-cbse-notes-class-10-science-5
Hence, the number of carbon compounds increases to a huge number.

8. Hydrocarbons: a Large number of hydrocarbons can be classified as:
carbon-compounds-cbse-notes-class-10-science-6
Note: In an open chain, the name of parent chain is derived from the root word and suffix ane, ene or yne is added depending on the type of bond present in a chain :
carbon-compounds-cbse-notes-class-10-science-7
Important: No alkene or alkyne is possible with single carbon atom because double or triple bond is not possible between carbon and hydrogen atom. It is only between two carbon atoms.

9. Functional Group:

An atom or a group of atoms which when present in a compound gives specific properties to it, is called a functional group.
A single line shown along with a functional group is called as its free valency by which it gets attached to a compound by replacing one hydrogen atom or atoms, e.g., -Cl.
Functional group, replacing the hydrogen is also called as heteroatom because it is different from carbon, and can be nitrogen, sulphur, or halogen, etc.
Important: Replacement of hydrogen atom by a functional group is always in such a manner that valency of carbon remains satisfied.
carbon-compounds-cbse-notes-class-10-science-8
Note : Cl is named as prefix Chloro; Br as Bromo; NH2 as Amino and N02 as Nitro.
Important Note: Symbol ‘R’ in a formula represents an Alkyl Group which is formed by the removal of one hydrogen atom from an alkane.
carbon-compounds-cbse-notes-class-10-science-9

10. Homologous series: A series of organic compounds in which every succeeding member differs from the previous one by -CH2 group or 14 a.m.u.
Note : As the molecular mass increases in a series, : so physical properties of the compounds
show a variation, but chemical properties which are determined solely by a functional group, remains same within a series.

11. Nomenclature of Organic Compounds

Trivial or common names: These names were given after the source from which the organic compounds were first isolated, e.g., If a compound has one carbon atom, then its common name will have root word form and so on (see table).
carbon-compounds-cbse-notes-class-10-science-10
IUPAC name: International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry gave following rules for naming various compounds :
Identify the number of carbon atoms and write the word root corresponding to it. e.g., If a number of carbon atoms is three, then the word root is a prop.
Presence of a functional group is indicated by prefix or suffix as given in table 2, and table 3.
If the name of the functional group is to be given as a suffix, the last letter ‘e’ in the name of the compound is deleted and the suffix is added. e.g., a ketone with three carbon atoms is named as :
Propane – e = Propan + ‘one’ = Propanone. Alcohol with three carbons is propanol. Carboxylic acid with three carbons is propanoic acid.
Halogens, in IUPAC, are written as Prefixes, e.g., Compound With two carbons and one chloro group is named as chloroethane (CH3CH2CI).
12. Chemical properties of carbon compounds :
Main properties of carbon compounds are :
(a) Combustion Reaction
(b) Oxidation Reaction
(c) Addition Reaction.
(d) Substitution Reaction

(a) Combustion Reaction: A chemical reaction in which a substance burns in the presence of air or oxygen is called combustion reaction.
Note: Combustion is always an EXOTHERMIC reaction, e.g.,
carbon-compounds-cbse-notes-class-10-science-11
Remember:

Saturated hydrocarbons generally give clean flame whereas unsaturated hydrocarbons give sooty flame (because carbon content is more than hydrogen content in these, and hence carbon shows incomplete combustion and appears as soot).
Saturated hydrocarbons can give sooty flame in a limited supply of oxygen.
(b) Oxidation Reaction: The addition of oxygen in a compound upon combustion is called oxidation.
In addition to combustion, oxidation can also be : brought about by some substances which are
capable of giving oxygen to others, i.e., Oxidising agents, e.g., Acidified K2Cr207 (Potassium dichromate) and alkaline KMn04 (Potassium permanganate).
Note:
carbon-compounds-cbse-notes-class-10-science-12

(c) Addition Reaction: Addition of a molecule in unsaturated compounds in the presence of a catalyst, to give saturated compound is called an addition reaction, e.g.,
Hydrogenation of vegetable oils as shown in the reaction below :
carbon-compounds-cbse-notes-class-10-science-13

(d) Substitution Reaction: The reactions which involve the replacement of an atom or group of atoms from a molecule by another atom without any change in structure in the remaining part of the molecule.
carbon-compounds-cbse-notes-class-10-science-14

13. Ethanol: (or alcohol)
Colourless liquid, soluble in water, and has a distinct smell and burning taste. Its consumption in small quantities causes drunkenness and can be lethal.
carbon-compounds-cbse-notes-class-10-science-15

14. Ethanoic Acid: CH3COOH
Common Name: Acetic Acid.
5-8% solution of acetic acid in water is called Vinegar. And 100% pure acetic acid is called Glacial acetic acid because it has m.pt. 290 K and freezes forming glacier like crystals.
Reactions of ethanoic acid :
carbon-compounds-cbse-notes-class-10-science-16
Saponification : Esters in the presence of acid or base react to give back alcohol and carboxylic acid is called saponification.
carbon-compounds-cbse-notes-class-10-science-17

15. Soaps and Detergents :
Soaps and Synthetic Detergents: Soaps and detergents are substances used for cleaning.
Soap: Soaps are sodium or potassium salts of higher fatty acids, such as Oleic acid (C17H33COOH), Stearic acid (C17H35COOH), Palmitic acid (C15H31COOH), etc. These acids are present in the form of their esters along with glycerol (alcohol containing three hydroxyl groups). These esters, called ‘glycerides’ are present in fats and oils of animal and vegetable origin.
Preparation of Soap: When an oil or fat (glyceride) is treated with sodium hydroxide solution, it gets converted to sodium salt of the acid (soap) and glycerol. The reaction is known as saponification.
carbon-compounds-cbse-notes-class-10-science-18
Detergents: Chemically, detergents are sodium salts of sulphonic acids, i.e., detergents contain a sulphonic acid group (—S03H), instead^of a carboxylic acid group (—COOH), on one end of the hydrocarbon.
carbon-compounds-cbse-notes-class-10-science-19
The cleansing action of detergent is considered to be more effective than a soap.
Cleansing Action of Soaps and Detergents: The cleansing action of soaps and detergents follows the same principle.
carbon-compounds-cbse-notes-class-10-science-20
When soap or detergent is dissolved in water, the molecules gather together as clusters, called micelles. The tails stick inwards and the heads outwards.
In cleansing, the hydrocarbon tail attaches.itself to oily dirt. When water is agitated, the oily dirt tends to lift off from the dirty surface and dissociates into fragments. This gives an opportunity to other tails to stick to oil. The solution now contains small globules of oil surrounded by detergent molecules. The negatively charged heads present in water prevent the small globules from coming together and form aggregates. Thus, the oily dirt is removed from the object.

16. Scum: The insoluble precipitates formed by soap molecule when they react with calcium and magnesium ions present in hard water. Due to this, a lot of soap gets wasted and cleansing action gets reduced to a larger extent.

Dobereiner’s Triads: This classification is based on the atomic mass. According to this, when elements are arranged in order of increasing atomic masses, groups of three elements, having similar properties are obtained. The atomic mass of middle element of the triad being nearly equal to the average of the atomic masses of the other two elements.
For Example Li (6.9), Na (23), K (39).


 
Limitation: It fails to arrange all the known elements in the form of triads, even having similar properties.


 
Newland’s Law of Octaves: According to this ‘when elements are placed in order of increasing atomic masses, the physical and chemical properties of every 8th element are a repetition of the properties of the first element.’

Form of Newland’s octaves is given in the following table:
Periodic Classification of Elements Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 5 1

Limitations

Law of octaves was applicable only upto calcium (only for lighter elements).
Newland adjusted two elements in the same slot (e.g. Co and Ni), having different properties. For example; Co and Ni with Fluorine, Chlorine, Bromine and Iodine.
According to Newland, only 56 elements existed in nature and no more elements would be discovered in future.
Present attempts for the classification of elements: Mendeleev’s Periodic Table, the Modern Periodic Table.

Mendeleev’s Periodic Table: Mendeleev’s periodic table is based on the physical and chemical properties of elements and their atomic masses.


 
Mendeleev’s Periodic Law: According to this “The physical and chemical properties of the elements are the periodic function of their atomic masses.”

Periodicity of Properties: The repetition of properties of elements after certain regular intervals is known as Periodicity of Properties.

Merits of Mendeleev’s Periodic Table

Mendeleev’s left vacant places in his table which provided an idea for the discovery of new elements. Example: Eka-boron, Eka-aluminium and Eka-silicon.
Mendeleev’s periodic table was predicted properties of several undiscovered elements on the basis of their position in Mendeleev’s periodic table.
It is useful in correcting the doubtful atomic masses of some elements.
Noble gases could accommodate in the Mendeleev’s periodic table without disturbing the periodic table after discovery.
Limitations of Mendeleev’s Periodic Table
(a) No fixed position for hydrogen: No correct position of the hydrogen atom was in Mendeleev’s periodic table.
Example: Position of hydrogen with alkali metals and halogens (17th group).

(b) No place for isotopes: Position of isotopes were not decided.
Example: Cl-35 and Cl-37.


 
(c) No regular trend in atomic mass: Position of some elements with lower atomic masses before with higher atomic mass.
Example: Ni-58.7 before Co-58.9.

Mendeleev’s original periodic table is reproduced in the table below
Periodic Classification of Elements Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 5 2


 
The Modern Periodic Table: In 1913, Henry Moseley showed that the atomic number of an element is a more fundamental property than its atomic mass.

Modern Period Law: The physical and chemical properties of elements are the periodic function of their atomic number.
Modern periodic table is based on atomic number of elements.
Atomic number (Z) is equal to the number of protons present in the nucleus of an atom of an element.
Modern periodic table contains 18 vertical column known as group and seven horizontal rows known as periods.
On moving from left to right in a period, the number of valence electrons increases from 1 to 8 in the elements present.
On moving from left to right in a period, number of shell remains same.
All the elements of a group of the periodic table have the same number of valence electrons.

Trends in Modern Periodic Table: Valency, Atomic size, metallic and non-metallic characters, and Electronegativity.
(i) Valency: The valency of an element is determined by the number of valence electrons present in the outermost shell of its atom (i.e. the combining capacity of an element is known as its valency).
In Period: On moving from left to right in a period, the valency first increases from 1 to 4 and then decreases to zero (0).
Periodic Classification of Elements Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 5 3

In Groups: On moving from top to bottom in a group, the valency remains same because the number of valence electrons remains the same.
Example: Valency of first group elements = 1 Valency of second group elements = 2.

(ii) Atomic size: Atomic size refers to radius of an atom. It is a distance between the centre of the nucleus and the outermost shell of an isolated atom.
In Period : On moving from left to right in a period, atomic size decreases because nuclear charge increases.
Example: Size of second period elements: Li > Be > B > C > N > O > F
Point to know: The atomic size of noble gases in corresponding period is largest
due to presence of fully filled electronic configuration (i.e. complete octet).
In Group: Atomic size increases down the group because new shells are being
added in spite of the increase in nuclear charge.
Example ; Atomic size of first group element : Li < Na < K < Rb < Cs < Fr
Atomic size of 17th group elements : F < Cl < Br < I

(iii) Metallic character: It is the tendency of an atom to lose electrons. In Period: Along the period from left to right, metallic characters decreases because a tendency to lose electron decreases due to the increase in nuclear charge. Example: Metallic character of second period elements: Li > Be > B > C >> N > O > F
In Group: Metallic character, when moving from top to bottom increases because the atomic size and tendency to lose electrons increases.
Example: First group element : Li < Na < K < Rb < Cs
Periodic Classification of Elements Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 5 4
17th group elements: F < Cl < Br < I

(iv) Non-metallic character: It is tendency of an atom to gain electrons.
In Period: Along the period from left to right, non-metallic character increases because tendency to gain electrons increases due to increase in nucleus charge. Example ; Non-metallic character of 2nd period elements : Li < Be < B < C < N < O < F In Group: On moving from top to bottom in a group, non-metallic character decreases because atomic size increases and tendency to gain electrons decreases. Ex. Non-metallic character of 17th period element: F > Cl > Br > I

(v) Chemical Reactivity
In metals: Chemical reactivity of metals increases down the group because tendency to lose electrons increases. Example ; Li < Na < K < Rb < Cs (1st group) In non-metals: Chemical reactivity of non-metals decreases down the group because tendency to gain electrons decreases. Example: F > Cl > Br > I (17th group)

(vi) Electronegativity: It is tendency of an element to attract the shared pair of electrons towards it in a covalently bonded molecule. It increases with increase of nuclear charge or decrease in atomic size.
Along the period electronegativity increases. Example ;Li < Be < B < C < N < O < F. Down the group electronegativity decreases. Example ; Li > Na > K > Rb > Cs
F > Cl > Br > I

(vii) Nature of Oxides: Metal oxides are basic in nature. Ex. Na2O, MgO etc.
Non-metal oxides are acidic in nature. Ex. Cl2O7, SO3, P2O5,

In the case of metal reactivity, it increases down the group because of the tendency to lose electrons increases.

In the case of non-metal reactivity, decreases down the group because of the tendency to gain electrons decreases.

Group: The vertical columns in Mendeleev’s, as well as in Modern Periodic Table, are called groups.

Period: The horizontal rows in the Modern Periodic Table and Mendeleev’s Periodic Table are called periods.

There are 18 groups and 7 (seven) periods in the Modern Periodic Table.

Atomic size: The atomic size may be visualised as the distance between the centre of the nucleus and the outermost shell of an isolated atom.

The trend of atomic size (radius) in moving down a group: Ongoing down in a group of the Periodic Table, the atomic size increases because a new shell of electrons is added to the atoms at every step. There is an increase in distance between the outermost shell electrons and the nucleus of the atom.

The trend of atomic size (radius) in moving from left to right in a period: On moving from left to right along a period, the size of atoms decreases because on moving from left to right, the atomic number of elements increases which means that the number of protons and electrons in the atoms increases. Due to the large positive charge on the nucleus, the electrons are pulled in more closely to the nucleus and the size of the atom decreases.

Characteristics of triads of J.W. Dobereiner.

Elements of a triad show similar chemical properties.
These elements of a triad show specific trends in their physical properties.
The atomic mass of the middle element was roughly the average of the atomic masses of the other two elements.
Example: Atomic mass of Na is 23 in the triad Li, Na and K. This atomic mass is the average of the atomic masses of Li and K which have atomic masses 7 and 39 respectively.

Triads as formed by Dobereiner.
1st Triad
Li – Lithium
Na – Sodium
K – Potassium

2nd Triad
Ca – Calcium
Sr – Strontium
Ba – Barium

3rd Triad
Cl – Chlorine
Br – Bromine
I – Iodine

Mendeleev’s Periodic Law: It states that “the properties of elements are the periodic functions of their atomic masses.” It means the properties of the elements depend on their atomic masses and the elements are given a position in the periodic table on the basis of their increasing atomic masses.

Merits of Mendeleev’s Periodic Table
(i) Mendeleev left a number of gaps in his table to accommodate the new elements which would be discovered later on. So Mendeleev boldly predicted the existence of some more elements. He even predicted the properties of some of these elements and named them as Eka-boron, Eka-aluminium and Eka-silicon respectively. Later on the elements were discovered, for example, gallium replaced Eka-aluminium and it showed properties similar to that of aluminium.

(ii) He gave the proper position to the noble gases which were discovered later on, without disturbing the existing order of elements. He placed them in a new group.

Limitations of Mendeleev’s classification:

The position of isotopes could not be explained because isotopes have the same chemical properties but different atomic masses. If the elements are arranged according to atomic masses, the isotopes should be placed in different groups of the Periodic Table.
The atomic masses do not increase in a regular manner in going from one element to the next.
He could not assign a correct position to hydrogen in his table because hydrogen has some properties similar to alkali metals and some properties similar to halogens.
Modem Periodic Law: This law was proposed by Henry Moseley, a scientist in 1913. According to this Law, “Properties of elements are the periodic function of their atomic number.” It means that the properties of elements depend on their atomic number and the elements are given positions in the periodic table on the basis of their increasing atomic number. As atomic number determines the distribution of electrons in the orbits, and electrons of the outermost orbit determine the properties of an element.

Groups and periods in the Modem (long form) Periodic Table: There are 18 groups (vertical columns) and 7 periods (horizontal lines) in the Modern (or long form) Periodic Table. The number of the period is equal to the number of shells in the atoms of the elements belonging to that period.

Trends in Mendeleev’s Periodic Table

The properties of elements are periodic functions of their atomic mass.
It has 8 groups.
No place could be assigned to isotopes of an element.
There were three gaps left by Mendeleev in his Periodic Table.
No fixed position was given to hydrogen in this Periodic Table.
No distinction was made between metals and non-metals.
Transition elements are placed together in Group VIII.
Inert gases were not known at the time of Mendeleev.
Trends in Modem Periodic Table
(i) Valency: Elements belonging to the same group have the same number of valence electrons and thus the same valency. Valency in a particular period from left to right first increases as positive valency and then decreases as negative valency.
Example: In elements of 2nd period:
Li has 1+ valency, then Be2+, B3+, C4+ covalency, N3- valency, then O2- and F(-) valency.

(ii) The atomic size or atomic radius increases: as we move down in a group and it decreases as we move from left to right in a period. Atomic size increases down a group due to the increase in the number of shells. Atomic size decreases along a period due to an increase in the nuclear charge which tends to pull the electrons closer to the nucleus and reduces the size of the atom.

(iii) Metallic and Non-Metallic properties: In the modern periodic table metals are on the left side and non-metals on the right side of the table. A zig-zag line of metalloids separates metals from non-metals.

Metallic characters decrease from left to right in a period and increase while going down in a group.
Non-metallic characters increase from left to right in a period due to increase in the electronegativity and these characters decrease from top to bottom in a group due to the decrease in the electronegativity of atoms while going down in a group.
1. Need for classification of elements:
Increase in the discovery of different elements made it difficult to organise all that was known about the elements. To study a large number of elements with ease, various attempts were made. The attempts resulted in the classification of elements into metals and non-metals.

2. Dobereiner’s triads:
Johann Wolfgang Dobereiner, a German chemist, classified the known elements in groups of three elements on the basis of similarities in their properties. These groups were called triads.
(i) Characteristics of Triads:

Properties of elements in each triad were similar.
Atomic mass of the middle element was roughly the average of the atomic masses of the other two elements.
(ii) Examples of Triads:
periodic-classification-clements-cbse-notes-class-10-science-1
(iii) Limitations: Dobereiner could identify only three triads. He was not able to prepare triads of all the known elements.

3. Newlands’ Law of Octaves:
John Newlands’, an English scientist, arranged the known elements in the order of increasing atomic masses and called it the ‘Law of Octaves’. It is known as ‘Newlands’ Law of Octaves’.
(i) Characteristics of Newlands’ Law of Octaves:

It contained the elements from hydrogen to thorium.
Properties of every eighth element were similar to that of the first element.
(ii) Table showing Newlands’ Octaves:
periodic-classification-clements-cbse-notes-class-10-science-2
(iii) Limitations of Newlands’ law of Octaves:

The law was applicable to elements up to calcium (Ca).
It contained only 56 elements.
In order to fit elements into the table, Newlands’ adjusted two elements like cobalt and nickel in die the same slot and also put some unlike elements under the same note.
4. Mendeleev’s Periodic Table: Dmitri Ivanovich – 5 ’ Mendeleev, a Russian demist, was the most important contributor to the early development of a periodic table of elements wherein the elements were arranged on the basis of their atomic mass and chemical properties.

Characteristics of Mendeleev’s Periodic Table:
Mendeleev arranged all the 63 known elements in increasing order of their atomic masses.
The table contained vertical columns called ‘groups’ and horizontal rows called ‘periods’.
The elements with similar physical and chemical properties came under the same groups.
Mendeleev’s Periodic Law: The properties of elements are the periodic function of their atomic masses.
Achievements of Mendeleev’s Periodic Table:
Through this table, it was very easy to study the physical and chemical properties of various elements.
Mendeleev adjusted few elements with a slightly greater atomic mass before the elements with slightly lower atomic mass, so that elements with similar properties could be grouped together. For example, aluminium appeared before silicon, cobalt appeared before nickel.
Mendeleev left some gaps in his periodic table.
He predicted the existence of some elements that had not been discovered at that time. His predictions were quite true as elements like scandium, gallium and germanium were discovered later.
The gases like helium, neon and argon, which were discovered later, were placed in a new group without disturbing the existing order.
Limitations: 
No fixed positions were given to hydrogen in the Mendeleev’s periodic table.
Positions of Isotopes of all elements was not certain according to Mendeleev’s periodic table.
Atomic masses did not increase in a regular manner in going from one element to the next.
5. Modem Periodic Table: Henry Moseley, gave a new ! property of elements, ‘atomic number’ and this was I adopted as the basis of Modem Periodic Table.
(i) Modem Periodic Law: Properties of elements are a periodic function of i their atomic number.
(ii) The position of elements in Modem Periodic Table:

The modem periodic table consists of 18 groups and 7 periods.
Elements present in any one group have the same number of valence electrons. Also, the number of shells increases as we go down the group.
Elements present in any one period, contain the same number of shells. Also, with increase in atomic number by one unit on moving from left to right, the valence shell electrons increases by one unit.
Each period marks a new electronic shell getting filled.
(iii) Table showing Electronic Configuration of First 20 Elements:
periodic-classification-clements-cbse-notes-class-10-science-3
Trends in the Modern Periodic Table:

Valency: Valency of an element is determined by the number of valence electrons present in the outermost shell of its atom.
Valency of elements in a particular group is same.
Valency of elements in a period first increases from one to four and then decreases to zero.
Atomic Size: Atomic size refers to the radius of an atom.
In a period, atomic size and radii decreases from left to right.
In a group, atomic size and radii increases from top to bottom.
Metallic and Non-metallic Properties:

The tendency to lose electrons from the outermost shell of an atom, is called metallic character of an element.
The tendency to gain electrons from the outermost shell of an atom, is called non-metallic character of an element.
periodic-classification-clements-cbse-notes-class-10-science-4
 

Nutrition: The process by which an organism takes food and utilizes it, is called nutrition.
Need for Nutrition: Organisms need the energy to perform various activities. The energy is supplied by the nutrients. Organisms need various raw materials for growth and repair. These raw materials are provided by nutrients.
Nutrients: Materials which provide nutrition to organisms are called nutrients. Carbohydrates, proteins and fats are the main nutrients and are called macronutrients. Minerals and vitamins are required in small amounts and hence are called micronutrients.
Modes of Nutrition
1. Autotrophic Nutrition.
2. Heterotrophic Nutrition.
Autotrophic Nutrition – Life Processes Class 10 Notes

The mode of nutrition in which an organism prepares its own food is called autotrophic nutrition. Green plants and blue-green algae follow the autotrophic mode of nutrition.

The organisms which carry out autotrophic nutrition are called autotrophs (green plants).
Life Processes Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 6 1
Autotrophic nutrition is fulfilled by the process, by which autotrophs intake CO2 and H2O, and convert these into carbohydrates in the presence of chlorophyll, sunlight is called photosynthesis.
Equation
photosynthesis Equation Life Processes Class 10 Notes
Nutrition in Plants: Green plants prepare their own food. They make food in the presence of sunlight. Sunlight provides energy’, carbon dioxide and water are the raw materials and chloroplast is the site where food is made.

What is Photosynthesis in biology class 10?
Photosynthesis: The process by which green plants prepare food is called photosynthesis.

During this process, the solar energy is converted into chemical energy and carbohydrates are formed.
Green leaves are the main site of photosynthesis.
The green portion of the plant contains a pigment chloroplast, chlorophyll (green pigment).
The whole process of photosynthesis can be shown by the following equation:
Life Processes Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 6 25
Raw Materials for Photosynthesis:

Sunlight
Chlorophyll: Sunlight absorbed by chloroplast
CO2: Enters through stomata, and oxygen (O2) is released as a byproduct through stomata on the leaf.
Water: Water + dissolved minerals like nitrogen, phosphorous etc., are taken up by the roots from the soil.
How do raw materials for photosynthesis become available to the plant?

Water comes from the soil, through the xylem tissue in roots and stems.
Carbon dioxide comes in the leaves through stomata.
Site of Photosynthesis: Chloroplast in the leaf. Chloroplast contains chlorophyll (green pigment)

Main Events of Photosynthesis:

Absorption of light energy by chlorophyll.
Conversion of light energy into chemical energy + splitting (breaking) of water into hydrogen and oxygen.
Reduction of CO2 to carbohydrates.
Sunlight activates chlorophyll, which leads to splitting of the water molecule.
The hydrogen, released by the splitting of a water molecule is utilized for the reduction of carbon dioxide to produce carbohydrates.
Oxygen is the by-product of photosynthesis.
Carbohydrate is subsequently converted into starch and is stored in leaves and other storage parts.
The splitting of water molecules is a part of the light reaction.
Other steps are part of the dark reaction during photosynthesis.
Life Processes Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 6 3



Stomata – Life Processes Class 10 Notes

Stomata: These are tiny pores present in the epidermis of leaf or stem through which gaseous exchange and transpiration occur.
Functions of stomata

Exchange of gases, O2 and CO2.
Loses a large amount of water (water vapour) during transpiration.
Life Processes Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 6 4
Opening and closing of stomatal pores:

The opening and closing of stomatal pores are controlled by the turgidity of guard cells.
When guard cells uptake water from surrounding cells, they swell to become a turgid body, which enlarges the pore in between (Stomatal Opening).
While, when water is released, they become flaccid shrinking to close the pore (Stomatal Closing).
Life Processes Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 6 5
Significance of Photosynthesis:

Photosynthesis is the main way through which solar energy is made available for different living beings.
Green plants are the main producers of food in the ecosystem. All other organisms directly or indirectly depend on green plants for food.
The process of photosynthesis also helps in maintaining the balance of carbon dioxide and oxygen in the air.
Heterotrophic Nutrition – Life Processes Class 10 Notes

The mode of nutrition in which an organism takes food from another organism is called heterotrophic nutrition. Organisms, other than green plants and blue-green algae follow the heterotrophic mode of nutrition. Heterotrophic nutrition can be further divided into three types, viz. saprophytic nutrition, holozoic nutrition, and parasitic.

Saprophytic Nutrition: In saprophytic nutrition, the organism secretes the digestive juices on the food. The food is digested while it is still to be ingested. The digested food is then ingested by the organism. All the decomposers follow saprophytic nutrition. Some insects, like houseflies, also follow this mode of nutrition.
Holozoic Nutrition: In holozoic nutrition, the digestion happens inside the body of the organism. i.e., after the food is ingested. Most of the animals follow this mode of nutrition.
Parasitic Nutrition: The organism which lives inside or outside another organism (host) and derives nutrition from it is known as parasites and this type of mode of nutrition is called parasitic nutrition. For example Cuscuta, tick etc.
Nutrition in Amoeba

Amoeba is a unicellular animal which follows the holozoic mode of nutrition.
In holozoic nutrition, the digestion of food follows after the ingestion of food. Thus, digestion takes place inside the body of the organism.
Holozoic nutrition happens in five steps, viz. ingestion, digestion, absorption, assimilation and egestion.
Life Processes Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 6 6
Steps of Holozoic Nutrition:

Ingestion: The process of taking in the food is called ingestion.
Digestion: The process of breaking complex food substances into simple molecules is called digestion. Simple molecules, thus obtained, can be absorbed by the body.
Absorption: The process of absorption of digested food is called absorption.
Assimilation: The process of utilization of digested food, for energy and for growth and repair is called assimilation.
Egestion: The process of removing undigested food from the body is called egestion.
Amoeba is a unicellular animal which follows the holozoic mode of nutrition. The cell membrane of amoeba keeps on protruding into pseudopodia. Amoeba surrounds a food particle with pseudopodia and makes a food vacuole. The food vacuole contains food particle and water. Digestive enzymes are secreted in the food vacuole and digestion takes place. After that, digested food is absorbed from the food vacuole. Finally, the food vacuole moves near the cell membrane and undigested food is expelled out.

Nutrition in Human Beings – Life Processes Class 10 Notes
Human beings are complex animals, which have a complex digestive system. The human digestive system is composed of an alimentary canal and some accessory glands. The alimentary canal is divided into several parts, like oesophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine, rectum and anus. Salivary gland, liver and pancreas are the accessory glands which lie outside the alimentary canal.

Structure of the Human Digestive System:
The human digestive system comprises of the alimentary canal and associated digestive glands.

Alimentary Canal: It comprises of mouth, oesophagus, stomach, small intestine and large intestine.
Associated Glands: Main associated glands are
Salivary gland
Gastric Glands
Liver
Pancreas
Mouth or Buccal Cavity:

The mouth has teeth and tongue. Salivary glands are also present in the mouth.
The tongue has gustatory receptors which perceive the sense of taste.
The tongue helps in turning over the food so that saliva can be properly mixed in it.
Teeth help in breaking down the food into smaller particles so that, swallowing of food becomes easier.
There are four types of teeth in human beings. The incisor teeth are used for cutting the food.
The canine teeth are used for tearing the food and for cracking hard substances.
The premolars are used for the coarse grinding of food. The molars are used for fine grinding of food.
Life Processes Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 6 7
Salivary glands secrete saliva: Saliva makes the food slippery which makes it easy to swallow the food. Saliva also contains the enzyme salivary amylase or ptyalin. Salivary amylase digests starch and converts it into sucrose, (maltose).
Life Processes Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 6 8

Oesophagus: Taking food from mouth to stomach by Peristaltic movement.


 
Peristaltic movement: Rhythmic contraction of muscles of the lining of the alimentary canal to push the food forward.

Stomach

Stomach is a bag-like organ. Highly muscular walls of the stomach help in churning the food.
The walls of the stomach secrete hydrochloric acid. Hydrochloric acid kills the germs which may be present in food.
Moreover, it makes the medium inside the stomach as acidic. The acidic medium is necessary for gastric enzymes to work.
The enzyme pepsin, secreted in the stomach, does partial digestion of protein.
The mucus, secreted by the walls of the stomach saves the inner lining of the stomach from getting damaged from hydrochloric acid.
Life Processes Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 6 9
Small Intestine: It is a highly coiled tube-like structure. The small intestine is longer than the large intestine but its lumen is smaller than that of the large intestine. The small intestine is divided into three parts, like duodenum, jejunum and ileum.

Liver: Liver is the largest organ in the human body. The liver manufactures bile, which gets stored in the gall bladder. From the gall bladder, bile is released as and when required.


 
Pancreas: Pancreas is situated below the stomach. It secretes pancreatic juice which contains many digestive enzymes.
Life Processes Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 6 10
Bile and pancreatic juice go to the duodenum through a hepatopancreatic duct. Bile breaks down fat into smaller particles. This process is called emulsification of fat. After that, the enzyme lipase digests fat into fatty acids and glycerol. Trypsin and chymotrypsin are enzymes which digest protein into amino acids. Complex carbohydrates are digested into glucose. The major part of digestion takes place in the duodenum.


 
No digestion takes place in the jejunum: The inner wall in the ileum is projected into numerous finger-like structures, called villi. Villi increase the surface area inside the ileum so that optimum absorption can take place. Moreover, villi also reduce the lumen of the ileum so that food can stay for a longer duration in it, for optimum absorption. Digested food is absorbed by villi.

Large Intestine:

Large intestine is smaller than the small intestine.
Undigested food goes into the large intestine.
Some water and salt are absorbed by the walls of the large intestine. After that, the undigested food goes to the rectum, from where it is expelled out through the anus.
Large Intestine bbsorb excess of water. The rest of the material is removed from the body via the anus. (Egestion).
Respiration – Life Processes Class 10 Notes
Types of respiration, aerobic and anaerobic respiration, human respiratory system, respiration in plants.

Respiration: The process by which a living being utilises the food to get energy, is called respiration. Respiration is an oxidation reaction in which carbohydrate is oxidized to produce energy. Mitochondria is the site of respiration and the energy released is stored in the form of ATP (adenosine triphosphate). ATP is stored in mitochondria and is released as per need.

Steps of respiration:
Breaking down of glucose into pyruvate: This step happens in the cytoplasm. Glucose molecule is broken down into pyruvic acid. Glucose molecule is composed of 6 carbon atoms, while pyruvic acid is composed of 3 carbon atoms.
Fate of Pyruvic Acid: Further breaking down of pyruvic acid takes place in mitochondria and the molecules formed depend on the type of respiration in a particular organism. Respiration is of two types, viz. aerobic respiration and anaerobic respiration.
Respiration involves
Gaseous exchange: Intake of oxygen from the atmosphere and release of CO2 → Breathing.
Breakdown of simple food in order to release energy inside the cell → Cellular respiration
Types of Respiration – Life Processes Class 10 Notes
Aerobic respiration: This type of respiration happens in the presence of oxygen. Pyruvic acid is converted into carbon dioxide. Energy is released and water molecule is also formed at the end of this process.
Anaerobic respiration: This type of respiration happens in the absence of oxygen. Pyruvic acid is either converted into ethyl alcohol or lactic acid. Ethyl alcohol is usually formed in case of anaerobic respiration in microbes, like yeast or bacteria. Lactic acid is formed in some microbes as well as in the muscle cells.
Glucose (6 carbon molecule) → Pyruvate (3 carbon molecules) + Energy
Pyruvate (In yeast, lack of O2) → Ethyl alcohol + Carbon dioxide + Energy
Pyruvate (In muscles, lack of O2) → Lactic Acid + Energy
Pyruvate (In mitochondria; the presence of O2) → Carbon dioxide + Water + Energy
The equations for the above reactions can be written as follows:
Life Processes Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 6 11
Life Processes Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 6 12
Life Processes Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 6 13

Pain in leg muscles while running:

When someone runs too fast, he may experience throbbing pain in the leg muscles. This happens because of anaerobic respiration taking place in the muscles.
During running, the energy demand from the muscle cells increases. This is compensated by anaerobic respiration and lactic acid is formed in the process.
The deposition of lactic acid causes pain in the leg muscles. The pain subsides after taking rest for some time.
Exchange of gases:

For aerobic respiration, organisms need a continuous supply of oxygen, and carbon dioxide produced during the process needs to be removed from the body.
Different organisms use different methods for the intake of oxygen and expulsion of carbon dioxide.
Diffusion is the method which is utilized by unicellular and some simple organisms for this purpose.
In plants also, diffusion is utilized for exchange of gases.
In complex animals, respiratory system does the job of exchange of gases.
Gills are the respiratory organs for fishes. Fishes take in oxygen which is dissolved in water through gills.
Since, availability of oxygen is less in the aquatic environment, so the breathing rate of aquatic organisms is faster.
Insects have a system of spiracles and trachease which is used for taking in oxygen.
Terrestrial organisms have developed lungs for exchange of gases.
Availability of oxygen is not a problem in the terrestrial environment so breathing rate is slower as compared to what it is in fishes.
Terrestrial organisms: Use atmospheric oxygen for respiration.
Aquatic organisms: Use dissolve oxygen for respiration.

Human respiratory system – Life Processes Class 10 Notes


 
The human respiratory system is composed of a pair of lungs. These are attached to a system of tubes which open on the outside through the nostrils.
Following are the main structures in the human respiratory system:

Nostrils: There are two nostrils which converge to form a nasal passage. The inner lining of the nostrils is lined by hair and remains wet due to mucus secretion. The mucus and the hair help in filtering the dust particles out from inhaled air. Further, air is warmed up when it enters the nasal passage.
Pharynx: It is a tube-like structure which continues after the nasal passage.
Larynx: This part comes after the pharynx. This is also called voice box.
Trachea: This is composed of rings of cartilage. Cartilaginous rings prevent the collapse of trachea in the absence of air.
Bronchi: A pair of bronchi comes out from the trachea, with one bronchus going to each lung.
Bronchioles: A bronchus divides into branches and sub-branches inside the lung.
Alveoli: These are air sacs at the end of bronchioles. The alveolus is composed of a very thin membrane and is the place where blood capillaries open. This is alveolus, where the oxygen mixes with the blood and carbon dioxide exits from the blood. The exchange of gases, in alveoli, takes place due to the pressure differential.
Life Processes Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 6 14

Passage of air through the respiratory system in human beings:
Life Processes Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 6 15

Breathing Mechanism

The breathing mechanism of lungs is controlled by the diaphragm and the intercostalis muscles.
The diaphragm is a membrane which separates the thoracic chamber from the abdominal cavity.
When the diaphragm moves down, the lungs expand and the air is inhaled.
When the diaphragm moves up, the lungs contract and air are exhaled.
Life Processes Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 6 16
Life Processes Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 6 17

Transportation – Life Processes Class 10 Notes
Circulatory system of human being, transportation in plants. Human beings like other multicellular organism need a regular supply of foods, oxygen etc. This function is performed by a circulatory system or transport system.

Transportation in Human Beings: The circulatory system is responsible for transport of various substances in human beings. It is composed of the heart, arteries, veins and blood capillaries. Blood plays the role of the carrier of substances.
Life Processes Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 6 18


 
1. Heart: Heart is a muscular organ, which is composed of cardiac muscles.

It is so small that, it can fit inside an adult’s wrist. The heart is a pumping organ which pumps the blood.
The human heart is composed of four chambers, viz. right atrium, right ventricle, left ventricle and left atrium.
Systole: Contraction of cardiac muscles is called systole.
Diastole: Relaxation of cardiac muscles is called diastole.
2. Arteries:

These are thick-walled blood vessels which carry oxygenated blood from the heart to different organs.
Pulmonary arteries are exceptions because they carry deoxygenated blood from the heart to lungs, where oxygenation of blood takes place.
3. Veins:

These are thin-walled blood vessels which carry deoxygenated blood from different organs to the heart, pulmonary veins are exceptions because they carry oxygenated blood from lungs to the heart.
Valves are present in veins to prevent back flow of blood.
Life Processes Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 6 19

4. Capillaries: These are the blood vessels which have single-celled walls.

Blood: Blood is a connective tissue which plays the role of the carrier for various substances in the body. Blood is composed of 1. Plasma 2. Blood cells 3. Platelets.

Blood plasma: Blood plasma is a pale coloured liquid which is mostly composed of water. Blood plasma forms the matrix of blood.
Bloods cells: There are two types of blood cells, viz. Red Blood Cells (RBCs) and White Blood Cells (WBCs).
(a) Red Blood Corpuscles (RBCs): These are of red colour because of the presence of haemoglobin which is a pigment. Haemoglobin readily combines with oxygen and carbon dioxide. The transport of oxygen happens through haemoglobin. Some part of carbon dioxide is also transported through haemoglobin.
(b) White Blood Corpuscles (WBCs): These are of pale white colour. They play important role in the immunity.
Platelets: Platelets are responsible for blood coagulation. Blood coagulation is a defense mechanism which prevents excess loss of blood, in case of an injury.
Lymph:

Lymph is similar to blood but RBCs are absent in lymph.
Lymph is formed from the fluid which leaks from blood capillaries and goes to the intercellular space in the tissues. This fluid is collected through lymph vessels and finally return to the blood capillaries.
Lymph also plays an important role in the immune system.
Lymph a yellowish fluids escape from the blood capillaries into the intercellular spaces contain less proteins than blood.
Lymph flows from the tissues to the heart assisting in transportation and destroying germs.
Double circulation: In the human heart, blood passes through the heart twice in one cardiac cycle. This type of circulation is called double circulation. One complete heartbeat in which all the chambers of the heart contract and relax once is called cardiac cycle. The heart beats about 72 times per minute in a normal adult. In one cardiac cycle, the heart pumps out 70 mL blood and thus, about 4900 mL blood in a minute. Double circulation ensures complete segregation of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood which is necessary for optimum energy production in warm-blooded animals.
Life Processes Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 6 20

Transportation in plants: Plants have specialized vascular tissues for transportation of substances. There are two types of vascular tissues in plants.

Xylem: Xylem is responsible for transportation of water and minerals. It is composed of trachids, xylem vessels, xylem parenchyma and xylem fibre. Tracheids and xylem vessels are the conducting elements. The xylem makes a continuous tube in plants which runs from roots to stem and right up to the veins of leaves.
Carry water and minerals from the leaves to the other part of the plant.
Phloem: Phloem is responsible for transportation of food. Phloem is composed of sieve tubes, companion cells, phloem parenchyma and bast fibers. Sieve tubes are the conducting elements in phloem.
Carries product of photosynthesis from roots to other part of the plant.
Transportation in plants
Life Processes Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 6 21

Ascent of sap: The upward movement of water and minerals from roots to different plant parts is called ascent of sap. Many factors are at play in ascent of sap and it takes place in many steps. They are explained as follows :

Root pressure: The walls of cells of root hairs are very thin. Water from soil enters the root hairs because of osmosis. Root pressure is responsible for movement of water up to the base of the stem.
Capillary action: A very fine tube is called capillaiy, water, or any liquid, rises in the capillary because of physical forces and this phenomenon is called capillary action. Water, in stem, rises up to some height because of capillaiy action.
Adhesion-cohesion of water molecules: Water molecules make a continuous column in the xylem because of forces of adhesion and cohesion among the molecules.
Transpiration pull: Loss of water vapour through stomata and lenticels, in plants, is called transpiration. Transpiration through stomata creates vacuum which creates a suction, called transpiration pull. The transpiration pull sucks the water column from the xylem tubes and thus, water is able to rise to great heights in even the tallest plants.
Transport of food: Transport of food in plants happens because of utilization of energy. Thus, unlike the transport through xylem, it is a form of active transport. Moreover, the flow of substances through phloem takes place in both directions, i.e., it is a two-way traffic in phloem.
Transpiration is the process of loss of water as vapour from aerial parts of the plant.
Functions

Absorption and upward movement of water and minerals by creating pull.
Helps in temperature regulation in plant.
Transport of food from leaves (food factory) to different parts of the plant is called Translocation.

Excretion – Life Processes Class 10 Notes
Human excretory system, excretion in plants.

Excretion in human beings:

Removal of harmful waste from the body is called excretion.
Many wastes are produced during various metabolic activities.
These need to be removed in time because their accumulation in the body can be harmful and even lethal for an organism.
Human Excretory System:

The human excretory system is composed of a pair of kidneys.
A tube, called ureter, comes out of each kidney and goes to the urinary bladder.
Urine is collected in the urinary bladder, from where it is expelled out through urethra as and when required.
Life Processes Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 6 22

Excretory system of human beings includes :

A pair of kidneys.
A urinary bladder.
A pair of the ureter.
A urethra.
Kidney:

Kidney is a bean-shaped organ which lies near the vertebral column in the abdominal cavity.
The kidney is composed of many filtering units, called nephrons.
Nephron is called the functional unit of kidney.
Nephron

It is composed of a tangled mess of tubes and a filtering part, called glomerulus.
The glomerulus is a network of blood capillaries to which renal artery is attached.
The artery which takes blood to the glomerulus is called afferent arteriole and the one receiving blood from the glomerulus is called efferent arteriole.
The glomerulus is enclosed in a capsule like portion, called bowman’s capsule. The bowman’s capsule extends into a fine tube which is highly coiled.
Tubes from various nephrons converge into collecting duct, which finally goes to the ureter.
Life Processes Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 6 23

Urine formation in the kidney: The urine formation involves three steps:

Glomerular filtration: Nitrogenous wastes, glucose, water, amino acid filter from the blood into bowman’s capsule of the nephron.
Tubular reabsorption: Now, useful substances from the filtrate are reabsorbed back by capillaries surrounding the nephron.
Secretion: Extra water, salts are secreted into the tubule which opens up into the collecting duct and then into the ureter.
Urine produced in the kidneys passes through the ureters into the urinary bladder where it is stored until it is released through the urethra.
The purpose of making urine is to filter out waste product from the blood i.e., urea which is produced in the liver.

Haemodialysis: The process of purifying blood by an artificial kidney. It is meant for kidney failure patient.

Excretion in Plants
Life Processes Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 6 24

Other wastes may be stored in leaves, bark etc. which fall off from the plant.
Plants excrete some waste into the soil around them.
Gums, resin → In old xylem
Some metabolic wastes in the form of crystals of calcium oxalates in the leaves of colocasia and stem of Zamikand.
Nutrition in Plants and Animals

Nutrition: Process of obtaining and utilizing of food is known as nutrition.

Mode of nutrition:

Autotrophic Nutrition (All green plants)
Heterotrophic Nutrition (Animals, Man, Non-green plants)
Saprotrophic nutrition
Parasitic nutrition
Holozoic nutrition
Autotrophs: It is a mode of nutrition in which organisms can make their own food from simple raw material. Example, all green plants.

Heterotrophs: It is a mode of nutrition in which organisms cannot prepare their food on their own and depend on others. Example, animals.


 
Saprotrophic Nutrition: It is the process by which the organism feeds on dead and decaying matter. Example, Rhizopus, Mucor, yeast.

Photosynthesis: It is the process by which green plants prepare their own food.

Raw materials for photosynthesis:

Water and Minerals: These are absorbed by the roots from the soil.
Carbon dioxide: Carbon dioxide enters the leaves through tiny pores called stomata.
Sunlight: Energy from the sun is called solar energy.
Chlorophyll: Chlorophyll pigment helps leaves to capture solar energy.
Products of Photosynthesis: Carbohydrate-glucose- It is converted to starch.

Symbiotic relationship: Two organisms live in a close association and develop a relationship that is beneficial to both this is called a symbiotic relationship.
Example, Lichen is a living partnership between a fungus an alga. Fungus absorbs water and provides shelter and alga prepare food by photosynthesis


 
Insectivores: Plants feed on insects for their nitrogen requirements.

Holozoic nutrition: It means feeding on solid food. Organism takes complex organic food into the body. Example, man, amoeba, dog, etc.

Herbivores: Animals which feed on plants only. Example, deer, cow.
Carnivores: Animals which feed on flesh or meat. Example, tiger.
Omnivores: Animals which feed on both plant and flesh. Example, man, dog.
Steps of Holozoic nutrition:

Ingestion: Taking food into the mouth.
Digestion: Break down of large insoluble food into small water-soluble molecules by enzymes.
Absorption: Digested food absorbed through the intestinal wall into the blood.
Assimilation: Absorbed food is taken by body cells for releasing energy, growth and repair.
Egestion: Eliminating undigested food from the body.
Digestive organs of human beings: Mouth, oesophagus, stomach, small intestine and large intestine with glands like salivary gland, liver, pancreas.

Teeth: An organ which breaks down the complex food and helps in chewing the food.

Milk teeth: The first set of 20 small teeth when the baby is 6-7 months old.
Permanent teeth: The second set of 32 larger teeth, when a child is 6-7 years old and comes by replacing milk teeth.
Enamel: A white, strong, shining, protective material covering on teeth.

Tongue: A muscular organ attached to the floor of the buccal cavity which helps in tasting and mixing the food with saliva for digestion.

Transportation in Plants and Animals

Vascular tissue: A plant tissue which helps in transportation.
Xylem tissue: It helps in transporting water and minerals in plants.
Phloem: It helps in transporting food in plants.
Translocation: The process of transporting food from leaves to other parts of plants.
Transpiration: A loss of water from stomata in leaves.
Blood: A red colour fluid which circulates in the body of animals.
Plasma: Fluid part of the blood which consists of nutrients, hormones, and waste products.
Blood vessel: Tube-like structure present in the body for carrying blood inside the body.
Artery: It carries oxygenated blood from the heart to body parts.
Vein: It carries deoxygenated blood from body parts to the heart.
Capillary: A thin-walled narrow tube which connects artery and vein.
Heart: A muscular organ present in the thoracic cavity and helps in pumping blood in the body.
Double circulation: A circulatory system in which blood travels twice through the heart in one complete cycle.
Heartbeat: One complete contraction and relaxation of the heart (72 times in a minute).
Stethoscope: Instrument which measures heartbeat.
Systolic pressure: Maximum pressure at which blood flows during contraction of the heart. (120 mm Hg)
Diastolic pressure: Minimum pressure at which blood flows during relaxation of the heart. (80 mm Hg)
Sphygmomanometer: Instrument which measures blood pressure.
Lymph: A light yellow liquid flowing from body tissue to the blood circulatory system and provides immunity.
Excretion in Plants and Animals

Excretion: It is the process of removing waste products from the body.
Excretory products of plants: CO2, O2, water vapour, peel of bark, fruits, leaves, gum, raisin, etc.
Excretory products of humans: Carbon dioxide, urea, etc.
Kidney: Organ which removes the toxic substance urea from blood and filters it.
Urine: A yellowish liquid which contains water and urea.
Dialysis: The procedure used for cleaning the blood of a person in case of kidney failure.
Nephron: Functional unit of excretory system present in the kidney for filtering blood.
Renal Artery: Blood vessels which bring blood from heart to kidney.
Renal Vein: Blood vessel which brings blood from kidney to heart.

Control and Co-ordination in Animals: Nervous system and endocrine system.
In animals, the nervous system and hormonal system are responsible for control and co¬ordination.

Receptors: Receptors are the specialized tips of the nerve fibres that collect the information to be conducted by the nerves.
Receptors are in the sense organs of the animals.
These are classified as follows :

Phono-receptors: These are present in inner ear.
Functions: The main functions are hearing and balance of the body.
Photo-receptors: These are present in the eye.
Function: These are responsible for visual stimulus.
Thermo-receptors: These are present in skin.
Functions: These receptors are responsible for pain, touch and heat stimuli.
These receptors are also known as thermoreceptors.
Olfactory-receptors: These are present in nose.
Functions: These receptors receive smell.
Gustatory-receptors: These are present in the tongue.
Functions: These helps in taste detection.
Control and Coordination Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 7 1

Nervous System: The nervous system is composed of specialized tissues, called nervous tissue. The nerve cell or neuron is the functional unit of the nervous system. It is the nervous system which is mainly responsible for control and coordination in complex animals.

Functions of the nervous system

Nervous system receives information from the environment.
To receive the information from the various body.
To act according to through muscles and glands.
A neuron is the structural and functional unit of the nervous system.

Neuron: Neuron is a highly specialized cell which is responsible for the transmission of nerve impulses. The neuron consists of the following parts
(i) Cyton or cell body: The cell body or cyton is somewhat star-shaped, with many hair like structures protruding out of the margin. These hair-like structures are called dendrites. Dendrites receive the nerve impulses.
(ii) Axon: This is the tail of the neuron. It ends in several hair-like structures, called axon terminals. The axon terminals relay nerve impulses.
(iii) Myelin sheath: There is an insulator cover around the axon. This is called myelin sheath. The myelin sheath insulates the axon against nerve impulse from the surroundings.
Control and Coordination Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 7 2

Types of neuron

Sensory neuron: These neurons receive signals from a sense organ.
Motor neuron: These neurons send signals to a muscle or a gland.
Association or relay neuron: These neurons relay the signals between sensory neuron and motor neuron.
Synapse: The point contact between the terminal branches of axon of one neuron with the dendrite of another neuron is called synapse.

Neuromuscular Junction (NMJ): NMJ is the point where a muscle fibre comes in contact with a motor neuron carrying nerve impulse from the control nervous system.


 
Transmission of nerve impulse: Nerve impulses travel in the following manner from one neutron to the next :
Dendrites → cell body → axon → nerve endings at the tip of axon → synapse → dendrite of next neuron.
Chemical released from axon tip of one neuron, cross the synapse or neuromuscular junction to reach the next cell.


 
Human Nervous System: The nervous system in humans can be divided into three main parts
1. Central Nervous System: The central nervous system is composed of the brain and the spinal cord. The brain controls all the functions in the human body. The spinal cord works as the relay channel for signals between the brain and the peripheral nervous system.


 
2. Peripheral Nervous System: The peripheral nervous system is composed of the cranial nerves and spinal nerves. There are 12 pairs of cranial nerves. The cranial nerves come our of the brain and go to the organs in the head region. There are 31 pairs of spinal nerves. The spinal nerves come out of the spinal cord and go to the organs which are below the head region.

3. Autonomous Nervous System: The autonomous nervous system is composed of a chain of nerve ganglion which runs along the spinal cord. It controls all the involuntary actions in the human body. The autonomous nervous system can be divided into two parts :

Sympathetic nervous system.
Parasympathetic nervous system.
Sympathetic Nervous System: This part of the autonomous nervous system heightens the activity of an organ as per the need. For example, during running, there is an increased demand for oxygen by the body. This is fulfilled by an increased breathing rate and increased heart rate. The sympathetic nervous system works to increase the breathing rate the heart rate, in this case.

Parasympathetic Nervous System: This part of the autonomous nervous system slows the down the activity of an organ and thus has a calming effect. During sleep, the breathing rate slows down and so does the heart rate. This is facilitated by the parasympathetic nervous system. It can be said that the parasympathetic nervous system helps in the conservation of energy.
Control and Coordination Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 7 3


 
Human Brain: Human brain is a highly complex organ, which is mainly composed of nervous tissue. The tissues are highly folded to accommodate a large surface area in less space. The brain is covered by a three-layered system of membranes, called meninges. Cerebrospinal fluid is filled between the meninges. The CSF providers cushion the brain against mechanical shocks. Furthermore, protection. The human brain can be divided into three regions, viz. forebrain, midbrain and hindbrain.
Control and Coordination Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 7 4

Parts of Human Brain :

Fore-brain: It is composed of the cerebrum.
Mid-brain: It is composed of the hypothalamus.
Hind-brain: It is composed of the cerebellum, pons, medulla, oblongata.
Some main structures of the human brain are explained below :
Cerebrum: The cerebrum is the largest part in the human brains. It is divided into two hemispheres called cerebral hemispheres.

Functions of cerebrum

The cerebrum controls voluntary motor actions.
It is the site of sensory perceptions, like tactile and auditory perceptions.
It is the seat of learning and memory.
Hypothalamus: The hypothalamus lies at the base of the cerebrum. It controls sleep and wake cycle (circadian rhythm) of the body. It also controls the urges for eating and drinking.

Cerebellum: Cerebellum lies below the cerebrum and at the back of the whole structure. It coordinates the motor functions. When you are riding your bicycle, the perfect coordination between your pedalling and steering control is achieved by the cerebellum.

It controls posture and balance.
It controls the precision of voluntary action.
Medulla: Medulla forms the brain stem, along with the pons. It lies at the base of the brain and continues into the spinal cord. The medulla controls various involuntary functions, like hear beat respiration, etc.
It controls involuntary actions.
Example: Blood pressure, salivation, vomiting.

Pons: It relays impulses between the lower cerebellum and spinal cord, and higher parts of the brain like the cerebrum and midbrain, also regulates respiration.


 
Spinal cord: Spinal cord controls the reflex actions and conducts massages between different parts of the body and brain.

Reflex Action: Reflex action is a special case of involuntary movement involuntary organs. When a voluntary organ is in the vicinity of sudden danger, it is immediately pulled away from the danger to save itself. For example, when your hand touches a very hot electric iron, you move away your hand in a jerk. All of this happens in flash and your hand is saved from the imminent injury. This is an example of reflex action.

Reflex Arc: The path through which nerves signals, involved in a reflex action, travel is called the reflex arc. The following flow chart shows the flow of signal in a reflex arc.
Receptor → Sensory neuron → Relay neuron → Motor neuron → Effector (muscle)
The receptor is the organ which comes in the danger zone. The sensory neurons pick signals from the receptor and send them to the relay neuron. The relay neuron is present in the spinal cord. The spinal cord sends signals to the effector via the motor neuron. The effector comes in action, moves the receptor away from the danger.
Control and Coordination Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 7 5
The reflex arc passes at the level of the spinal cord and the signals involved in reflex action do not travel up to the brain. This is important because sending signals to the brain would involve more time.
Although every action is ultimately controlled by the brain, the reflex action is mainly controlled at the level of spinal cord.


 
Protection of brain and spinal cord
Brain is protected by a fluid filled balloon which acts as shocks absorber and enclosed in cranium (Brain box)
Spinal chord is enclosed in vertebral column.

Muscular Movements and Nervous Control: Muscle tissues have special filaments, called actin and myosin. When a muscle receives a nerve signal, a series of events is triggered in the muscle. Calcium ions enter the muscle cells. It result in actin and myosin filaments sliding towards each other and that is how a muscle contracts. Contraction in a muscle brings movement in the related organ.
Control and Coordination Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 7 6


 
Endocrine System: The endocrine system is composed of several endocrine glands. A ductless gland is called endocrine gland. Endocrine gland secretes its product directly into the bloodstream. Hormones are produced in the endocrine glands. Hormone is mainly composed of protein. Hormones assist the nervous system in control and co-ordination. Nervous do not react to every nook and corner of the body and hence hormones are needed to affect control and coordination in those parts. Moreover, unlike nervous control, hormonal control is somewhat slower.

Hormones: These are the chemical messengers secreted in very small amounts by specialised tissues called ductless glands. They act on target tissues/organs usually away from their source. Endocrine System helps in control and coordination through chemical compounds called hormones.

Endocrine Gland: A ductless gland that secretes hormones directly into the bloodstream.
Control and Coordination Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 7 7

Endocrine  Gland

Location	Hormones Produced	Functions
Pituitary gland (also known as the master gland)	At the base of the brain	Growth hormone (GH).
Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH). Follicle stimulating hormone (FSH)	GH stimulates growth.
TSH stimulates the functioning of the thyroid gland.
FSH stimulates the follicles during ovulation.
Thyroid Gland	Neck	Thyroxine	Controls general metabolism and growth in the body.
Adrenal gland	Above kidneys	Adrenalin	Prepares the body for emergency situations and hence is also called ‘Fight and flight’ hormone.
Pancreas	Near stomach	Insulin	Controls blood sugar level
Testis (male)	In Scrotum	Testosterone	Sperm production, development of secondary sexual characters during puberty.
Ovary (female)	Near uterus	Oestrogen	Egg production, development of secondary sexual characters during puberty.
Iodised salt is necessary because: Iodine mineral is essential part of thyronine hormone so it is important that we must consume iodised salt as in turn it is essential for thyroid gland as it controls carbohydrate, proteins and fat metabolism for best balance of growth deficiency of iodine might cause disease called goitre.

Diabetes: Cause : It is due to deficiency of insulin hormone secreted by pancreas that is responsible to lower/control the blood sugar levels.

Treatment : Patients have to internally administer injections of insulin hormone which helps in regulating blood-sugar level.

In case of flight or fight reaction to an emergency situation, Adrenal glands → release adrenaline into blood → which acts on heart and other tissues → causes faster heart beat → more oxygen to muscles → reduced blood supply to digestive system and skin → diversion of blood to skeletal muscles → increase in breathing rate.

Feedback mechanism: A type of self-regulating mechanism in which the level of one substance in body influences the level of another.
Control and Coordination Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 7 8

Control and Co-ordination in Plants: Movements in plants and plant harmones.
Co-ordination in Plants: Unlike animals, plants do not have a nervous system. Plants use chemical means for control and co-ordination. Many plant hormones are responsible for various kinds of movements in plants. Movements in plants can be divided into two main types :

Tropic movement
Nastic movement
1. Tropic Movement: The movements which are in a particular direction in relation to the stimulus are called tropic movements. Tropic movements happen as a result of growth of a plant part in a particular direction. There are four types of tropic movements.
(i) Geotropic movement: The growth in a plant part in response to the gravity is called geotropic movement. Roots usually show positive geotropic movement, i.e. they grow in the direction of the gravity. Stems usually show negative geotropic movement.

(ii) Phototropic Movement: The growth in a plant part in response to light is called phototropic movement. Stems usually show positive phototropic movement, while roots usually show negative phototropic movement. If a plant is kept in a container in which no sunlight reaches and a hole in the container allows some sunlight; the stem finally grows in the direction of the sunlight. This happens because of a higher rate of cell division in the part of stem which is away from the sunlight. As a result, the stem bends towards the light. The heightened rate of cell division is attained by increased secretion of the plant hormone auxin in the which is away from sunlight.
Control and Coordination Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 7 9

(iii) Hydrotropic Movement: When roots grow in the soil, they usually grow towards the nearest source of water. This shows a positive hydrotropic movement.

(iv) Thigmotropism Movement: The growth in a plant part in response to touch is called thigmotropism movement. Such movements are seen in tendrils of climbers. The tendril grows in a way so as it can coil around a support. The differential rate of cell division in different parts of the tendril happens due to action of auxin.

2. Nastic Movement: The movement which do not depend on the direction from the stimulus acts are called nastic movement. For example, when someone touches the leaves of mimosa, the leaves droop. The drooping is independent of the direction from which the leaves are touched. Such movements usually happen because of changing water balance in the cells. When leaves of mimosa are touched, the cells in the leaves lose- water and become flaccid, resulting in drooping of leaves.
Control and Coordination Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 7 10

Plant hormones: Plant hormones are chemical which help to co-ordinate growth, development and responses to the environment.
Type of plant hormones: Main plant hormones are

Auxin: (Synthesized at shoot tip).
Function: Helps in growth.
Phototropism: more growth of cells towards the light.
Gibberellin: Helps in the growth of the stem.
Cytokinins: Promotes cell division.
Abscisic acid: Inhibits growth, cause wilting of leaves. (Stress hormone)
Control and Coordination in Plants

Stimuli: The change in the environment to which an organism responds.
Co-ordination: Working together of various organs of an organism in a systematic manner to produce a proper response.
Phyto-hormones: These are plant hormones.
Auxin: It is a plant hormone which promotes cell enlargement and growth in plants.
Gibberellins: A plant hormone which promotes cell differentiation and breaking dormancy of seeds and buds.
Cytokinin: A plant hormone which promotes cell division and the opening of stomata.
Abscisic Acid: It helps in inhibiting the growth of the plant and promotes wilting and falling of leaves and food.
Tropism: A growth movement of a plant which determines direction with the stimulus.
Nastism: A growth movement of a plant which does not determine direction with a stimulus.
Phototropism: Movement of plants towards a light.
Geotropism: Movement of plants towards the gravity of earth.
Chemotropism: Movement of plants towards chemicals.
Hydrotropism: Movement of plants towards the water.
Thigmotropism: Movement of plants towards a response to the touch of an object.
Control and Coordination in Animals

Stimuli: The change in the environment to which the organism responds.
Co-ordination: Working together of various organs of an organism in a systematic manner to produce a proper response.
Neuron: Functional unit of the nervous system.
Synapse: A microscopic gap between a pair of adjacent neurons.
Receptor: A cell in a sense organ which is sensitive to stimuli.
Motor nerves: It carries the message from the brain to body parts for action.
Sensory nerves: It carries the message from body to brain.
Olfactory receptor: It detects smell by the nose.
Gustatory receptor: It detects taste by a tongue.
Thermoreceptor: It detects heat and cold by a skin.
Photoreceptor: It detects light by eye.
Reflex action: Sudden movement or response to the stimulus which occurs in a very short duration of time and does not involve any will or thinking of the brain.
Brain: An organ present in the skull which controls and regulates the activity of the whole body and is known as president of the body.
Cerebrum: Main thinking part of brain present in the forebrain area which controls all voluntary actions.
Cerebellum: It is present in the hindbrain area and helps in maintaining posture and balance of the body.
Medulla: It is present in the hindbrain area and helps in controlling voluntary actions of the brain.
Spinal cord: It is a cylindrical structure of nerve fibres enclosed in the vertebral column which helps in the conduction of nerve impulses to and from the brain.

Heredity and Inherited Traits: Mendel’s Experiment; Sex determination.
Heredity refers to the transmission of characters from parents to offsprings. An inherited trait is a particular genetically determined feature that distinguishes a person from the others for example; attached or free ear lobes in human beings.

Rules for the inheritance of traits:
Mendel’s contribution: The rules for inheritance of traits in human beings are related to the fact that both mother and father contribute an equal amount of genetic material i.e. DNA to their offspring. So an offspring will get two versions of that trait from the two parents. Mendel worked out rules for inheritance of these traits. Gregor Johann Mendel regarded as the ‘Father of Genetics’ performed his experiments with garden peas (Pisum sativum) in the garden behind his monastery. He observed a number of contrasting characters in garden peas and observed their inheritance.


 
Some important terms
1. Chromosomes are long thread-like structures present in the nucleus of a cell which contain hereditary information of the cell in the form of genes.

2. DNA is a chemical in the chromosome which carries the traits in a coded form.


 
3. Gene is the part of a chromosome which controls a specific biological function.


 
4. Contrasting characters: A pair of visible charactes such as tall and dwarf, white and violet flowers, round and wrinkled seeds, green and yellow seeds etc.

5. Dominant trait: The character which expresses itself in a (Ft) generation is dominant trait. Example : Tallness is a dominant character in pea plant.

6. Recessive trait: The character which does not express itself but is present in a generation is recessive trait. Ex. dwarfism in the pea plant.

7. Homozygous: A condition in which both the genes of same type are present for example; an organism has both the genes for tallness it is expressed as TT and genes for dwarfness are written as tt.


 
8. Heterozygous: A condition in which both the genes are of different types for example; an organism has genes Tt it means it has a gene for tallness and the other for dwarfness only tall character is expressed.

9. Genotype: It is genetic make up of an individual for example; A pure tall plant is expressed as TT and hybrid tall as Tt.

10. Phenotype: It is external appearance of the organism for example; a plant having Tt composition will appear tall although it has gene for dwarfness.

11. Homologous pair of characters are those in which one member is contributed by the father and the other member by the mother and both have genes for the same character at the same position.

Mendel’s Experiment: Mendel started his experiment on the pea plants. He conducted first monohybrid and then dihybrid crosses.

Monohybrid Cross: The cross in which Mendel showed inheritance of dominant and recessive characters is monohybrid cross. To observe inheritance of single pair of contrasting characters
Heredity and Evolution Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 9 1
he took pure tall (genotype TT) and pure dwarf (genotype tt) pea plants and cross pollinated them to obtain first generation or first filial generation. In this figuration (F1 generation) he obtained only tall plants. This meant that only one of the parental traits was seen, not the mixture of the two. The plants of F generation or progeny are then self pollinated to obtain F2 generation or progeny. Now all plants were not tall. He obtained 75% tall plants and 25% dwarf plants i.e. the phenotypic ratio was 3:1. This indicates that in the F, generation both tall and dwarf traits were inherited but tallness expressed it self. Tallness is a dominant trait and dwarfness is a recessive trait. F2 generation has a genotypic ratio of 1 : 2 : 1 of three types of plants represented by TT, Tt and tt as shown in the cross.


 
Conclusion: Phenotypic ratio—Tall : Dwarf 3 : 1
Genotype ratio—Pure Tall : Hybrid Tall : Pure Dwarf 1 : 2 : 1

Law of Dominance: When parents having pure contrasting characters are crossed then only one character expresses itself in the Ft generation. This character is the dominant character and the character/factor which cannot express itself is called the recessive character.

Dihybrid Cross: Mendel also carried out experiments to observe inheritance of two pairs of contrasting characters, which is called dihybrid cross. He cross breed pea plants bearing round green seed with plants bearing wrinkled and yellow seeds. In the Fx generation he obtained all round and yellow seeds it means round and yellow traits of seeds are dominant features while wrinkled and green are recessive. He self-pollinated the plants of F: generation to obtain F2 generation, he obtained four different types of seeds round yellow, round green, wrinkled yellow and wrinkled green in the ratio of 9 : 3 : 3 : 1. He concluded that traits are independently inherited

Conclusion

Round and yellow seeds-9.
Round and green seeds-3.
Wrinkled and yellow seeds-3.
Wrinkled and green seeds-1.
How do traits get expressed?
Cellular DNA is the information source for making proteins in the cell.
A part of DNA that provides information for one particular protein is called a gene for that protein for example; the height of a plant depends upon the growth hormone which is in turn controlled by the gene. If the gene is efficient and more growth hormone is secreted the plant will grow tall. If the gene for that particular protein gets altered and less of it is secreted when the plant will remain short. Both the parents contribute equally to the DNA of next generation during sexual reproduction. They actually contribute a copy of the same gene for example; when tall plant is crossed with short plant the gametes will have single gene either for tallness or for shortness. F1 generation will get one gene for tallness and other for shortness also.
Heredity and Evolution Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 9 2

How do germ cells i.e. gametes get single set of genes from parents who have two copies in them ?
Each gene set is present, not as a single long thread of DNA, but as separate independent pieces each called a chromosome. Each cell gets two copies of the chromosome, one from each parent. Each germ cell or gamete has one copy of it because there is reductional division in the sex organs at the time of formation of gametes. When fertilization takes place normal number of chromosomes is restored in the progeny ensuring the stability of DNA of the species.


 
How is the sex of a newborn individual determined?
It is the process by which sex of a newborn can be determined.

Different species use different strategies for this :

In some animals the temperature at which fertilized eggs are kept determines whether the developing animals will be males or females.
Some animals like snails can change sex indicating that sex is not genetically determined.
In human beings sex of the individual is determined genetically; means genes inherited from the parents decide the sex of the offspring.
Sex determination in human beings: In human beings, all chromosomes are not paired. 22 chromosomes are paired but one pair called sex chromosome is odd in not having a perfect pair in males. Females have a perfect pair both represented by XX. On the other hand males have a normal sized X but the other is short called Y so it is shown as XY. All gametes or ova formed by the homogenetic female are similar i.e. have X chromosome. Males heterogenetic form two types of sperms i.e. half with X chromosome and the other half with Y chromosome. Sex of the baby will depend on fertilization. There are two possibilities :
Heredity and Evolution Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 9 3

Autosomes: Those chromosomes which do not play any role in sex determination.

Sex chromosomes: Those chromosomes which play a role in determining sex of the newborn.

If the sperm having X chromosome fertilizes with ovum with X chromosome then the baby will have XX chromosome and it will be female.
If the sperm having Y chromosome fertilizes with ovum with X chromosome then the baby will have XY chromosomes and it will be male.
Evolution: Acquired and inherited traits, Speciation, Evolution and classification, Evolution by stages, Human evolution.

Evolution: It is the sequence, of gradual, irreversible changes which took place in the primitive organisms over millions of years to form new present-day species. Variations that resulted in formation of new species occurred basically due to errors in DNA copying as well as due to sexual reproduction.

An Illustration to show variations in a population: A group of twelve red beetles live in green bushes and reproduce sexually so are likely to develop variations. There are the following possibilities

First situation: Crows eat these beetles as they can easily pick up red ones in the green bushes There is a colour variation during sexual reproduction and green beetles appears, it reproduces and its population increases. Crows are not able to see green beetles so their population continues to increase but that of red beetles decreases. This type of variation gives a survival advantage.

Second situation: Due to a colour variation few blue beetle appear forming blue population. Crows can see both red and blue and eat them. Initially there are more of red beetles and less of blue. There is sudden calamity, an elephant kills red beetles by stamping on bush, blue beetles survive reproduce and increase in number. In this case there is no survival advantage but provides diversity without any adaptation.

Third situation: As the population of beetles increases, the bushes suffer from a disease and the availability of food for beetles decreases. The size of beetles decrease but after a few years as the plant disease is eliminated and enough food is available for the beetles they come back to their normal size. This type of change is not inherited.
Heredity and Evolution Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 9 4

Acquired Traits: Acquired traits are those which are not inherited over generations as they are caused due to change in the non-reproductive tissue and are not passed on the DNA of the germ cells for example; the size of the beetles in the population decreased due to scarcity of food.

Inherited Trait: Inherited traits are caused due to changes in the DNA of germ cells which are inherited from generation to generation, for example; formation of green beetles in the population of red beetles.

Acquired Traits and Inherited Traits

Acquired Traits	Inherited Traits
(i) These are the traits which are developed in an individual due to special conditions.	(i) These are the traits which are passed from one generation to the next.
(ii) They cannot be transferred to the progeny.	(ii) They get transferred to the progeny.
(iii) They cannot direct evolution, e.g. low weight of starving beetles.	(iii) They cannot direct evolution, e.g. low weight of starving beetles.
Charles Darwin’s Idea of Evolution: His concept of evolution was based on the idea that new species were formed due to variations that occurred in the organisms Nature played an important role in selecting the organisms having suitable variations.

Speciation: It means the development of one or more species from an existing species The factors that could lead to rise of a new species are :

Gene flow: It means the exchange of genetic material by interbreeding between populations of the same species or between individuals within a population. It increases the variation in the genetic composition of a population.

Genetic drift: It is random change in the frequency of alleles in a populate over successive generation due to errors in the gametes. The process is rapid in smaller population. Genetic drift can lead to accumulation of changes in the generations.

Natural selection: According to Darwin, natural selection also plays an important role in bringing about evolution of new species of plants and animals. According to him variations existed between the individuals of a population and some natural phenomena eliminated those individuals which were less adapted. The surviving population would pass the hereditary advantageous features to their offsprings. With time this process would give rise to organisms different from the original population and new species are formed.

Isolation: When a population of a species splits into two, it cannot reproduce with each other and forms a new species, for example; when a population of beetles feed on bushes on a mountain range, some may start feeding on nearby bushes finding entry into a new subpopulation. They reproduce with them so genes enter in a new population. Ultimately the two groups will be incapable of reproducing with each other and new species will be formed.

Evolution and Classification: The organisms show certain features, like appearance and behaviour which are called characteristics for example; Plants can perform photosynthesis. The basic characteristics are shared by a large number of organisms. More characteristics which two species have in common more closely are related, if they are more closely related then they have common ancestors (explain the example of brother sister and cousins). Evolutionary relationships can be traced with the help of the following :

Homologous organs: Those organs which have the same basic structural design and developmental origin but perform different functions and appearance, for example; Forelimbs of frog, lizard, bird, bat and human beings. They have same design of bones but they perform different functions.
Heredity and Evolution Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 9 5

Analogous organs: Those organs which have different basic design and developmental origin but have similar appearance and perform a similar function, for example; wings of bat and bird. Wings of bat are folds of skin attached between fingers. But wing of birds are modified forelimbs.
Heredity and Evolution Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 9 6

Study of Fossils: Fossils are preserved remains of living organisms that lived in the past. When living organisms die their bodies decompose but some parts of their body may be in such an environment that they do not decompose for example; if a dead insect gets caught in hot mud it will not decompose quickly but the mud will harden and retain impressions of the body parts of the insects. These impressions are also called fossils: The age of fossil can be estimated in two ways :
The fossils that occur closer to earth surface are more recent to those found in deeper layers.
The second method is isotope dating i.e. detecting the ratio of different isotopes of the same element in the fossil material.
Heredity and Evolution Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 9 7

Significance of fossils: Fossils are formed layer by layer in the earths crust. The animals and plants which existed earlier are buried in the deeper layer which ones found in the upper layer. It is found that, deeper fossils have simpler structure than found than upper layer. Complete fossil record of animals like horse, camel, man has helped us to study the stages of evolution.

Evolution by stages: Evolution is a continuous and gradual process, complicated organs did not evolve by a single DNA change but were formed by bit by bit change over generations for example; complex organs like eyes were created by bit by bit changes, in between the rudimentary eye in some insects also provided a fitness advantage. The structure of eye in all organisms is different enough to have evolutionary origins. Some organs even developed for one particular function but later become useful for quite a different function, e.g Feathers developed to provide warmth to the animal but later helped in flight.

Some dinosaurs had feathers although they could not fly, this shows that birds are closely related to reptiles, since dinosaurs were reptiles Some dissimilar looking structures also evolved from common ancestors. The current example of such a process is wild cabbage plant from which different vegetables are generated by artificial selection rather than natural selection
Heredity and Evolution Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 9 8

Selection of short distance between the leaves has led to formation of cabbage that, we eat.
Selection for arrested flower development had led to broccoli,
Selection for sterile flowers had made cauliflower,
Selection for swollen-stem had formed kohlrabi.
Selection for large leaves had formed leafy vegetable kale,
Selection for colored leaves formed red cabbage.
To sum up we can say that evolutionary relationships can be established by

Study of Homologous organs
Study of Analogous organs
Study of fossils
Changes in DNA during reproduction
Evolution versus Progress: Evolution can not be called progress from lower forms to higher forms. It is basically forming more complex designs while the simpler once also keep growing. Evolution is generation of diversity with the help of environmental selection. Bacteria which were formed first have the capacity to live in diverse conditions and are still flourishing; on the other hand human beings which are highly evolved species can not be called the pinnacle of evolution but yet another species in the evolving life forms.

Human Evolution: Human evolution has been studied with the help of excavation; time dating and fossil study All human beings belong to single species i.e. Homo sapiens. Human species have come from Africa. Some of our ancestors left Africa while others stayed on. These migrants slowly spread across the planet i.e. West Asia, Central Asia, Eurasia, South Asia and East Asia They traveled to Indonesia, the Philippines, Australia and America They traveled forward and backward sometimes separating and sometimes coming back to mix with each other. They had come into being as an accident of evolution.
Heredity and Evolution Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 9 9

Although there is a great diversity of human forms all over the world get all humans are single species.

They didn’t go in a single line.
They went forward and backward.
Moved in and out of Africa.
Sometimes come back to mix with each other.
Heredity and Evolution Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 9 10
Genetics: Branch of science that deals with heredity and variation.

Heredity: It means the transmission of features/characters/traits from one generation to the next generation.

Variation: The differences among the individuals of a species/population are called variations.

Mendel and his work on Inheritance.
Gregor Johann Mendel started his experiments on plant breeding and hybridisation. Mendel was known as Father of Genetics.
The plant selected by Mendel was Pisutn sativum (garden pea). Mendel used a number of contrasting characters for garden pea.

Sex Determination: Phenomenon of decision or determination of sex of an offspring.

Factors Responsible for Sex Determination:

Environmental: In some animals, the temperature at which the fertilised eggs are kept decides the gender. Example, in turtle.
Genetic: In some animals like humans gender or individual is determined by a pair of chromosomes called sex chromosomes (XX – female; XY – male).
Sex Chromosomes: In human beings, there are 23 pairs of chromosomes. Out of these 22 chromosome pairs are called autosomes and the last pair of chromosomes that help in deciding the gender of that individual are called sex chromosome.
XX – female; XY – male
The cross done shows that half the children will be boys and half will be girls. All children will inherit an X chromosome from their mother regardless of whether they are boys or girls. Thus sex of children will be determined by what they inherit from their father, and not from their mother.

Acquired Traits:

These are the traits which are developed in an individual due to special conditions.
They cannot be transferred to the progeny.
They cannot direct evolution, for example, the low weight of starving beetles.
Inherited Traits:

These are the traits which are passed from one generation to the next.
They get transferred to the progeny.
They are helpful in evolution, for example, the colour of eyes and hair.
Microevolution: It is the evolution which takes place on a small scale. Example, change in body colour of beetles.

Speciation: It is the process of formation of new species. A species is a group of similar individuals that belong to a population that can interbreed and produce fertile offspring. Speciation takes place when the variation is combined with geographical isolation.

Gene flow: It is the exchange of genetic material by interbreeding between populations of the same species or individuals. Gene flow occurs between populations that are partly but not completely separated.

Genetic Drift: It is the random change in the frequency of alleles (gene pair) in a population over successive generations.
Genetic drift takes place due to:

severe changes in the DNA.
change in the number of chromosomes.
Natural Selection: The process by which nature selects and consolidates those organisms which are more suitably adapted and possesses favourable variations.

Evolution and classification. Both evolution and classification are interlinked.

Classification of species is a reflection of their evolutionary relationship.
The more characteristics two species have in common the more closely they are related.
The more closely they are related, the more recently they have a common ancestor.
Similarities among organisms allow us to group them together and to study their characteristics.
Tracing Evolutionary Relationships:

Homologous Organs: Morphological and anatomical evidences. These are the organs that have same basic structural plan and origin but different functions.
Example, forelimb of a horse (running), wings of bat (flying), paw of a cat (walk/ scratch/ attack) — same basic structure but different functions.
Analogous Organs: These are the organs that have different origin and structural plan but same functions.
Example, wings of a bat (elongated fingers with skin folds), wings of bird (feathery covering along the arm) — different structures but same functions.
Fossils: The remains and relics of dead organisms that lived in the remote past. Fossils provide evidence of evolution. Example, a fossil called Archaeopteryx has feathered wings like birds but teeth and tail like reptiles hence suggesting that birds and reptiles had a common ancestor.
Artificial Selection: Humans have been a powerful agent in modifying wild species to suit their own requirement throughout ages by using artificial selection. Example, wheat (many varieties obtained due to artificial selection).

1. Heredity : It refers to the transmission of characters or traits from the parents to their offspring. Heredity is the continuity of features from one generation to another which are present in fertilised egg or zygote. The zygote develops into an organism of a particular type only.

2. Genetics : It is the branch of biology which deals with heredity and variation. Genetics is to help our understanding of heredity by knowing how offspring inherit characteristics from their parents.

3. Variation : It means the differences in the characters or traits among the individuals of a species. Variations occur during reproduction both because of error in DNA copying and as a result of sexual reproduction. Variations contribute to evolution.
Causes of variations:

Different combinations of genetic material.
Some positive gene mutations.
Interaction of genes with environmental changes (adaptations).
Importance of variations:

It forms, the. basis of heredity.
It causes adaptations due to which organism can easily adjust to its changing environment.
Accumulation of variations forms the basis of evolution.
Remember!
Variations are produced both in sexual and asexual reproduction but amount of variations produced in asexual reproduction are subtle (so little) that they are hardly noticeable as compared to variations caused due to sexual reproduction.

4. Genotype : The genetic constitution of an organism e.g., Genotype of human male is 44 + XY and
genotype of human female is 44 + XX

5. Phenotype : The appearance of the organism, i.e., the way in which genotype is expressed. Phenotype is the result of interaction of genes with the environment.
e.g., Red colour may be controlled by a pair of genes RR. Now if genotype is RR phenotype will be red only but if genotype is Rr then also phenotype will be red since R is a dominant gene.

6. Gene : It is the basic unit of inheritance by which characters are transferred from parents to their offspring. Gene consists of a specific length of DNA on a chromosome. A specific Segment of DNA that provides the information for one protein is called gene for that protein.
According to Mendel, both parents must contribute equally to the DNA of the progeny during sexual reproduction. As both parents determine the trait in the progeny, so both parents must be contributing a copy of the same gene.

7. Chromosomes : These are the long threads present in the nucleus of every cell. Chromosomes are made- up of DNA and protein. Each chromosome contains very long molecule of DNA.
Remember!
Each gene set is present as separate independent pieces each called a chromosome. Each cell have two copies of each chromosome, one each from male and female parents. Every germ cell will take one chromosome from each pair and these may be of either maternal or paternal origin. When two germ cells combine, they will restore the normal number of chromosomes in the progeny, ensuring the stability of the DNA of the species. Such mechanism of inheritance is used by all sexually and asexually reproducing organisms.

8. Allele: It is an alternative form of a gene occupying the same position on a chromosome and affecting the same characters but in two alternative ways, e.g., the free and attached ear lobe are the alleles of ear lobe character.
Expressing allele of a gene :

Homozygous dominant in capital letters, e.g., tallness(TT)
Homozygous recessive in smalMetters, e.g., shortness or dwarfness (tt)
Heterozygous (Tt)-lt will be called hybrid tall.
9. Dominant allele: An allele that affects the phenotype of an organism both in heterozygous and homozygous condition. It is denoted by a capital letter, e.g., tallness in pea plant is denoted by ‘T.

10. Recessive allele: An allele that affects the phenotype of the organism in absence of a dominant allele, i.e., in homozygous recessive individuals. It is denoted by a small alphabet, e.g., dwarfness in pea plant is denoted by’t’.

11. Homozygous: When both alleles of a particular gene are the same, e.g., TT

12. Heterozygous : When both alleles of a particular gene are different, e.g., Tt

13. Diploid : Cells or organism containing two sets of genes, e.g., human body cells. Diploid cells have genetic constitution of 2n.

14. Haploid : Cells or organism containing one set of genes, e.g., human reproductive cells (sperms and ova). Haploid cells have genetic constitution of n.

15. Monohybrid cross : A cross between two parents taking the alternative traits of one single character, e.g., A cross between tall and dwarf pea plants.
Monohybrid Ratio :

In F1 generation : 100% hybrid
In F2 generation : phenotypic ratio is 3 : 1 and genotypic ratio is 1 : 2 : 1
16. Dihybrid cross: A cross between two parents taking into consideration alternative traits of two different characters, e.g., A cross between two pea plants one having round, green seeds and the other having wrinkled, yellow seeds.
Dihybrid Ratio :

F1 ratio is 100% Hybrid type.
F2 ratio : Phenotypic is 9 : 3 : 3 : 1 and Genotypic . ratio is very complex.
17. Human Blood Groups: There are four types of blood groups A, B, AB or O. These are controlled by a gene which is denoted by symbols IA, IB and IO (sometimes also denoted as i). The genes IA and IB show no dominance over each other (they are codominant, i.e., both expresses themselves independently). But these both genes are dominant over the gene IO. Therefore, blood group of a person depends on the type of genes present, e.g., (i) Blood group A has the following gene types :
heredity-and-evolution-cbse-notes-for-class-10-science-1

18. Determining sex of a newborn individual genetically:

In human beings the sex of the individual is ” determined genetically.
There are 23 pairs of chromosomes of which 22 are similar in male and female and are known as autosomes.
The remaining one is sex chromosome which is XY in males and XX in females.
Males produce two types of sperms X and Y, while female produces one type of egg X.
If a X type of sperm fertilizers the egg then the sex of baby will be female (XX).
If Y type of sperm fertilizers the egg then the sex of the baby will be male (XY).
heredity-and-evolution-cbse-notes-for-class-10-science-2
19. Mendel’s experiment to show that traits may be dominant or recessive:

Mendel conducted breeding experiments in garden pea.
selected pure plant of a tall/short plant.
produced first generation plants by crossing them.
found that all plants were tall.
produced the second generation by self-fertilization of hybrids.
found that three-quarter of the plants was tall and one quarter was short.
heredity-and-evolution-cbse-notes-for-class-10-science-3
20. Homologous chromosomes: A pair of corresponding chromosomes of the same shape and size, one from each parent.

21. Autosomes and Sex chromosomes : The identical » chromosome pairs are called autosomes. The
chromosome pair which is different are called sex chromosomes. Humans have 23 pairs of chromosomes. 1-22 pairs are autosomes while 23rd pair (XX in females and XY in males) which are designated as X and Y are sex chromosomes.

22. Molecular Phylogeny: It is the study of evolutionary relationships by comparing DNA of different species.

23. Natural selection : Natural selection is one of the basic mechanisms of evolution, along with mutation, migration and genetic drift. Natural selection means the environmental conditions prevailing around an organism against which organism adapts itself, grows – and reproduces further. This leads to a change in the composition of genes within a population further causing evolution. Thus, it can be said that,
Natural selection results in adaptation in population to fit their environment better. Thus, natural selection direct evolution in the population of a particular species.

24. Fossils of the information which they provide regarding evolution: Fossils are the remains of ancient life forms, which got preserved somehow in the layers of earth, snow or oil.
Information given by fossils:

They reveal that the life forms which existed earlier do not exist today which indicate that the living forms are ever changing (evolving).
They are used to guess the time when a particular organism existed on earth. It is done through carbon dating.
25. Genetic drift: The change in the frequency of some genes in a population which provides diversity without any survival advantage is called genetic drift.

26. The various ways in which individuals with a particular trait may increase in a population : Differences in population are responsible for the diversity such as, colour of eyes, hair, shape of ear lobes. This occurs due to : (i) Sexual reproduction (ii) Inaccuracies during DNA replication (iii) Due to environmental changes. This diversity will increase with time as these variations can be passed on only through DNA/genes during reproduction through reproductive tissue (germ cells or gametes).

If these variations give survival advantage, then such traits are selected in nature and such traits increase in a population.
Due to genetic drift. This occurs due to geographical or reproductive isolation. It results in the change in gene frequency in a particular: population.
Migration which leads to gene flow in and out of the population.
The mutation caused due to particular type of environment. ,
Acquired traits due to particular type of environment.
27. Evidence of evolution: Errors in DNA copying (mutation) and sexual reproduction lead to variations which form the basis of evolution. Characteristics that
are common in different kinds of living organisms provide evidence in favour of evolution.

28.Evolution : Evolution can be defined as a naturally occurring slow, continuous and irreversible process of change. The gradual change of living organisms from pre-existing organisms since the beginning of life is called organic evolution. Whereas, gradual change in elements from one form to another with time is termed as inorganic evolution, i.

29.Inherited traits : are those traits which are passed from one generation to another through specific genes. Any change in DNA of the germ cells will be passed.
30. Acquired traits : are those traits which are acquired by the organism in its lifetime, e.g., removal of tail cannot change the genes of the germ cells of the mice thus cannot be passed to next generation.

31. Speciation : It means the origin of new species from the existing ones. It happens when different populations of the same species evolve along different lines.
How speciation occurs ?

It occurs when two populations are isolated (both geographically and reproductively) leading to almost no gene flow between the two populations.
Over generations, genetic drift will accumulate different changes in each sub-population.
Natural selection may also operate differently in these different locations.
Together natural selection and genetic drift will cause such changes (severe changes in the DNA) that these two groups will not be able to reproduce with each other even if they happen to meet.
When DNA changes occur to larger extent, it may lead to change in the number of chromosomes or gene expression, eventually the germ cells of the two groups cannot fuse with each other. This leads to emergence of new species.
32. Estimating Age of Fossil: There are 2 methods :

Relative method : On digging, the fossils which are closer to the surface are more recent than the fossils found in deeper layers.
Dating fossils (carbon dating method): It is done by detecting the ratios of different isotopes of the same element (i.e., isotope of C-14 which is radioactive) in the fossil material.
33. Evolution by stages :

Complex organs like eye has evolved from rudimentary organs, (e.g., rudimentary eye in flatworm might be useful enough to give only a fitness advantage and the structure of eye in different organisms is different indicating them to have different evolutionary origins) not by a single DNA change but created bit-by-bit over generations.

A change that is useful for one property to start with can become useful later for quite a different
function (e.g., Feathers might start as providing insulation in cold weather. But later, they might be useful for flight. Some heavy birds and reptiles also have feathers but they do not fly.

Some very dissimilar looking structures evolve from a common ancestral design, e.g., wild cabbage was cultivated as a food plant and many different vegetables were generated by selection over last two thousand years, (a) Selection of very small distances between the leaves gave rise to cabbage we eat. (b) Selection for arrested flower development gave rise to broccoli, (c) Selection for sterile flowers gave rise to cauliflower (d) Selection for swollen parts gave rise to kohlrabi.(e) Selection for larger leaves gave rise to leafy vegetable kale. It suggests that, if these selections were not done then there would have been only wild cabbage.

34. Homologous organs are organs having same origin and basic structure but they appear different and perform different functions in various organisms,
e.g.,

Forelimbs of horse and arms of man.
Wings of birds and flippers of whale.
Similarities in basic structure of (homologous) organs in different organisms, indifferent groups indicate common ancestry.

35. Analogous organs are organs, which look similar because they perform same function, but they do not have same origin and basic structure.
e.g.,

Wings of birds and wings of insects.
Fins of fish and flippers of the whale.


Reflection of Light: The phenomenon of bouncing back of light into the same medium by the smooth surface is called reflection.

Incident light: Light which falls on the surface is called incident light.


 
Reflected light: Light which goes back after reflection is called reflected light.


 
The angle of incidence: The angle between the incident ray and the normal.

An angle of reflection: The angle between the reflected ray and the normal.

Mirror: The surface which can reflect the light is a mirror.

Plane Mirror: If the reflecting surface is a plane then the mirror is plane.

Spherical Mirror: If the reflecting surface is part of the hollow sphere then the mirror is a spherical mirror.
The spherical mirror is of two types:

Convex mirror: In this mirror reflecting surface is convex. It diverges the light so it is also called a diverging mirror.
Concave mirror: In this mirror reflecting surface is concave. It converges the light so it is also called converging mirror.
Parameters of Mirror:

Center of Curvature: The centre of hollow sphere of which mirror is a part.
The radius of curvature: The radius of hollow sphere of which mirror is a part.
Pole: The centre of mirror (middle point) is pole.
Principal axis: The line joining the pole and center of curvature is called principal axis.
Aperture: Size of mirror is called aperture of mirror.
Principal Focus: The point on the principal axis, where all the incident rays parallel to principal axis converge or diverge after reflection through mirror.
Focal Length: The distance between pole and focus point is focal length.
Special Rays for Formation of Image:

A ray of light which is parallel to the principal axis of a spherical mirror, after reflection converges or diverges from focus.
A ray of light passing through or appearing from the center of curvature of spherical mirror is reflected back along the same path.
A ray of light passing through or appearing from the focus of spherical mirror becomes parallel to the principal axis.
A ray of light which is incident at the pole of a spherical mirror is reflected back making same angle with principal axis.
Use of Concave Mirror: It is used as a makeup mirror, the reflector in torches, in headlights of cars and searchlights, doctor’s head-mirrors, solar furnace, etc.

Sign Conventions of Spherical Mirror

All the distances are measured from the pole of the mirror as the origin.
Distances measured in the direction of incident rays are taken as positive.
Distances measured opposite to the direction of incident rays are taken as negative.
Distances measured upward and perpendicular to the principal axis are taken as positive.
Distances measured downward and perpendicular to the principal axis are taken as negative.
1f=1v+1u …where f, v and u are focal length, image distance, object distance
Linear Magnification: This is the ratio of the height of the image to the height of the object.
m=h‘h …where m = magnification, h = height of image, h’ = height of object

Use of Convex Mirror: Convex mirror used as rear view mirror in vehicles, as shop security mirrors, etc.

REFRACTION

Refraction of Light: The bending of light at the interface of two different mediums is called Refraction of light.

If the velocity of light in medium is more, then medium is called optical rarer.
Example, air or vacuum is more optical rarer.
If the velocity of light in medium is less, then medium is called optical denser.
Example, glass is more denser than air.
Refractive Index: It represents the amount or extent of bending of light when it passes from one medium to another.
There are two types of refractive index

Relative refractive index and
Absolute refractive index.
Refractive index of medium with respect to other medium is called Relative Refractive Index.
Refractive index of medium 1 with respect to medium 2 = Speedoflightinmedium2(V2)Speedoflightinmedium1(V1)
Refractive index of medium with respect to air or vacuum is called Absolute Refractive Index.
Absolute refractive index of medium (m) = Speedoflightinair(c)Speedoflightinmedium(Vm)

 
Incident ray: It is incoming ray on the refracting surface.


 
Refracted ray: It is an outgoing ray from the refracting surface.

An angle of incidence (i): It is the angle between incident rays and perpendicular line (normal) at the point of incidence.

An angle of refraction (r): It is the angle between refracted rays and perpendicular line (normal) at the point of incidence.

Law of Refraction: According to this law

“The incident ray, refracted ray and normal at the point of incidence all lie in the same plane.”
“The ratio of the sine of the angle of incidence to the sine of the angle of refraction is constant.”
sinisinr = constant (µ)
Lens: The transparent refracting medium bounded by two surfaces in which at least one surface is curved is called lens.
Lenses are mainly two type

Convex lens and
Concave lens.
Center of Curvature: The centres of two spheres, of which lens is part is called the centre of curvature.

Radii of Curvature: The radii of spheres, of which lens is part is called radius of curvature.


 
Principal Axis: The line joining the centres of curvature of two surfaces of lens is called principal axis.


 
Optical Center: It is a special point on the principal axis. Light incident on the optical centre passes through the lens without deviation.

Principal Focus: The point on the principal axis at which all incident rays parallel to the principal axis converge or appear to diverge after refraction through the lens.

Special Rays for Image Formation by Lens:

An incident ray, parallel to the principal axis, after refraction passes through (or appears to come from), second focus of the lens.
An incident ray, passing through the optical center of the lens, goes undeviated from the lens.
An incident ray, passing through the (first) principal focus of the lens, or directed toward it, becomes parallel to the principal axis after refraction through lens.
Use of Lens: In photographic cameras, magnifying glass, microscope, telescope, the human eye.

1. Light travels in a straight line.

2. Light gets reflected when it falls on polished surfaces; like mirrors.

3. Light suffers refraction when it travels from one medium to another.

4. There is a change in the wavelengths!light when it moves from one medium into another.

5. The bouncing back of light when it strikes a smooth or polished surface is called reflection of light. Reflection is of two types; Specular or regular and Diffuse or irregular reflection.

6. The angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection. Mathematically, we have ∠i = ∠r.

7. The image is as far behind the mirror as the object is in front.

8. The image is unmagnified, virtual and erect.

9. The image has right-left reversal.

10. Focal length of a plane mirror is infinity.

11. Power of a plane mirror is zero.

12. If a plane mirror is turned by an angle, the reflected ray turns by 2θ.

13. The least size of a plane mirror to view an object is equal to half the size of the object.

14. Pole (Vertex): The central point of a mirror is called its pole.

15. Centre of curvature : The centre of the sphere of which the mirror is a part is called the centre of curvature. It is denoted by C.

16. Radius of curvature : The radius of the sphere of which the mirror is a part is called the radius of curvature. It is denoted by R.

17. Principal axis : The straight line passing through the pole and the centre of curvature of the mirror is called the principal axis.

18. Principal focus : It is a point on the principal axis at which the rays parallel to the principal axis meet after reflection or seem to come from. For a concave mirror, the focus lies in front of the mirror and for a convex mirror, it lies behind the mirror. In short, a concave mirror has a real focus while aconvex mirror has a virtual focus.

19. Focal plane : A plane, drawn perpendicular to the principal axis and passing through the principal focus.

20. Focal length : The distance between the pole and the focus is called the focal length. It is represented by f. The focal length is half the radius of curvature.

21. Aperture: The size of the mirror is called its aperture. It is also defined as the effective diameter of the light reflecting area of the mirror.

22. Real image : When the rays of light, after reflection from a mirror, actually meet at a point, then the image formed by these rays is said to be real. Real images can be obtained on a screen.

23. Virtual image: When the rays of light, after reflection from a mirror, appear to meet at a point, then the image formed by these rays is said to be virtual. Virtual images can’t be obtained on a screen.

24. The following rays are used while drawing ray diagrams to find the position of an image :

A ray of light parallel to the principal axis after reflection passes through the focus. (1)
A ray of light passing through the focus after reflection becomes parallel to the principal axis. (2)
A ray of light incident on the centre of curvature retraces its path after reflection form the mirror.
light-reflection-and-refraction-cbse-notes-for-class-10-science-1
25. For mirrors, the following results hold :
u is – ve, if the object is in front of the mirror.
(Real object)
u is + ve, if the object is behind the mirror.
(Virtual object)
v is – ve, if the image is in front of the mirror.
(Real image)
vis +ve, if the image is behind the mirror.
(Virtual image)
Focal length of a concave mirror is taken as – ve. Focal length of a convex mirror is taken as +ve.

26. When the image formed by a spherical mirror is real, it is also inverted and is on the same side of the mirror as the object. Since both v and u are negative, the magnification is negative.

27. When the image formed by a spherical mirror is virtual, it is also erect and is on the other side of the mirror as the object. In this case, u is – ve and v is + ve , therefore, m is positive.

28. The expression for the mirror formula is 1/u+1/v = 1/f

29. Linear magnification is given by the expression
light-reflection-and-refraction-cbse-notes-for-class-10-science-2

30. If m is positive, the image is erect w.r.t the object and if m is negative, the image is inverted w.r.t. the object.

31.The position of the image for various positions of the object for a concave mirror is as shown in the table below. The table also shows the use of the mirror for different positions of the object.
light-reflection-and-refraction-cbse-notes-for-class-10-science-3
The position of the image for various positions of the object for a convex mirror is as shown in the table below. The table also shows the use of the mirror for different positions of the object.
light-reflection-and-refraction-cbse-notes-for-class-10-science-4

32. The bending of light when it travels from one medium into another is called refraction of light

33.
light-reflection-and-refraction-cbse-notes-for-class-10-science-5

34. As light travels from ,one medium to another, the frequency of light does not change.

35. Light refracts because it has different speeds in different media.

36. The refraction of light obeys the following two laws :

The incident ray, the refracted ray and the normal at the point of incidence all lie in the same plane.
The ratio of the sine of the angle of incidence to the sine of the angle of refraction is a constant.This
constant is called the index of refraction or refractive index.
light-reflection-and-refraction-cbse-notes-for-class-10-science-6
37. If wng is the refractive index of glass w.r.t. water, ang  be the refractive index of glass w.r.t. air and anw  be the refractive index of water w.r.t. air ,then
light-reflection-and-refraction-cbse-notes-for-class-10-science-7

38. The most familiar and widely used optical device is the lens. A lens is an optical system with two refracting surfaces. The simplest lens has two spherical surfaces close enough together that we can neglect the distance between them. Such a lens is called a thin lens. The two common types of lenses are Converging lens or Convex lens, Diverging lens or Concave lens.

39. It should be noted that, if the above lenses are surrounded by .a material with a refractive index greater than that of the lens, the convex lens gets converted into a concave lens and vice-versa.

40. Any lens that is thicker at its centre than at its edges is a converging lens with positive f, and any lens that is thicker at its edges than at the centre is a diverging lens with negative f.

41. Optical centre : The central point C in the lens is called the optical centre. If a ray is incident towards the optical centre, it passes undeviated .through the lens.
light-reflection-and-refraction-cbse-notes-for-class-10-science-8

42.Principal axis: Since the lens contains two spherical surfaces, therefore, it has two centres of curvatures.
The line joining these centres and passing through the optical centre is called principal axis.

43. Aperture: The effective width of a lens through which refraction takes place is called the aperture.

44. Focus and Focal Length : If a beam of light moving parallel to the principal axis of a convex lens is incident on it, the rays converge or meet at a point on the principal axis. This point F is called the focus. The distance CF is called the focal length. If a beam of light moving parallel to the principal axis is incident on a concave lens, the beam of light diverges. If these diverged rays are produced backward, they meet at a point F on the principal . axis. The transmitted rays appear to come from this point. This point F is called the focus and distance CF is called the focal length.

45. For drawing the ray diagrams, we note the following :
light-reflection-and-refraction-cbse-notes-for-class-10-science-9
light-reflection-and-refraction-cbse-notes-for-class-10-science-10

All rays parallel to the principal axis after refraction pass through the principal focus or seem to come from it.
A ray of light passing through the focus after refraction becomes parallel to the principal axis.
A ray of light passing through the optical centre of the lens after refraction passes undeviated.
46. A convex and a concave lens can be supposed to be made-up of prisms.

47. Image formation by a concave lens.
light-reflection-and-refraction-cbse-notes-for-class-10-science-11

48. Image formation by a convex lens.
light-reflection-and-refraction-cbse-notes-for-class-10-science-12

49. New Cartesian sign conventions :

All distances, object distance (u), image distance (v) and focal length f are measured from the optical centre.
The distances measured in the direction of incident ray are taken as positive and distances measured against the direction of incident ray are taken as negative.
All distances (heights) of objects and images above principal axis are taken as positive and those below the principal axis are taken as negative.
50. For the two lenses, the sign conventions take the form

u is- ve, if the object is in front of the lens. (Real object)
u is +ve, if the object is virtual.
v is – ve, if the image is on the same side as that of the object. (Virtual image )
v is +ve, if the image is real.
Focal length of a concave lens is taken as – ve.
Focal length of a convex lens is taken as +ve.
51. Lens formula for convex lens 1/v-1/u = 1/f

52. The linear magnification produced by a lens is defined as the ratio of the size of the image (h’) to the size of the object (h). It is represented by m i.e.,
light-reflection-and-refraction-cbse-notes-for-class-10-science-13

53. If the magnification of a lens is negative, then the image formed is inverted and real.

54. If the magnification of a lens is positive, then the image formed is erect and virtual.

55. Power is defined as the reciprocal of the focal length. Power is measured in dioptre.

Human Eye: working of human eye, Persistence of vision, Power of accommodation of human eye, Defects of vision.

The Human Eye: It is a natural optical instrument which is used to see the objects by human beings. It is like a camera which has a lens and screen system.

Structure of the Human Eye
Human Eye and Colourful World Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 11 1

The various parts of eye and their functions :

Retina: It is a light sensitive screen inside the eye on which image is formed. It contains rods and cones.
Cornea: It is a thin membrane which covers the eye trail. It acts like a lens which refracts the light entering the eye.
Aqueous humour: It is fluid which fills the space between cornea and eye lens.
Eye lens: It is a convex lens made of transparent and flexible jelly like material. Its curvature can be adjusted with the help of ciliary muscles.
Pupil: It is a hole in the middle of iris through which light enters the eye. It appears black because light falling on it goes into the eye and does not come back.
Ciliary muscles: These are the muscles which are attached to eye lens and can modify the shape of eye lens which leads to the variation in focal lengths.
Iris: It controls the amount of light entering the eye by changing the size of the pupil.
Optical nerve: These are the nerves which take the image to the brain in the form of electrical signals.
The human eye is roughly spherical in shape with a diameter of about 2.3 cm. It consists of a convex lens made up of living tissues. Hence, human lenses are living organs contrary to the simple optical lenses. The following table lists the main parts of the human eye and their respective functions.

S.No.	Human Eye Part	Functions
1.	Pupil	Opens and closes in order to regulate and control the amount of light.
2.	Iris	Controls light level similar to the aperture of a camera.
3.	Sclera	Protects the outer coat.
4.	Cornea	A thin membrane which provides 67% of the eye’s focusing power.
5.	Crystalline lens	Helps to focus light into the retina.
6.	Conjunctive	Covers the outer surface (visible part) of the eye.
7.	Aqueous humour	Provides power to the cornea.
8.	Vitreous humour	Provides the eye with its form and shape.
9.	Retina	Captures the light rays focussed by the lens and sends impulses to the brain via the optic nerve.
10.	Optic nerve	Transmits electrical signals to the brain.
11.	Ciliary muscles	Contracts and extends in order to change the lens shape for focusing.
How Pupil Works?
For Example, You would have observed that when you come out of the cinema hall after watching the movie in the bright sunlight, your eyes get closed. And when you entered the hall from the bright light, you won’t be able to see and after some time you would be able to see. Here, the pupil of an eye provides a variable aperture, whose size is controlled by iris.
(a) When the light is bright: Iris contracts the pupil, so that less light enters the eye.
(b) When the light is dim: Iris expands the pupil, so that more light enters the eye.
Pupil opens completely when iris is relaxed.

Persistence of Vision: It is the time for which the sensation of an object continue in the eye. It is about 1/16th of a second.


 
Power of Accommodation: The ability of the eye lens to adjust its focal length accordingly as the distances is called power of accommodation.
Human Eye and Colourful World Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 11 2


 
Colour Blindness: A person having defective cone cells is not able to distinguish between the different colours. This defect is known as Colour Blindness.

Defects of Vision and their Correction
Myopia (Short-sightedness): It is a kind of defect in the human eye due to which a person can see near objects clearly but he cannot see the distant objects clearly. Myopia is due to
(i) excessive curvature of the cornea.
(ii) elongation of eyeball.
Human Eye and Colourful World Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 11 3


 
Correction: Since a concave lens has an ability to diverge incoming rays, it is used to correct this defect of vision. The image is allowed to format the retina by using a concave lens of suitable power as shown in the given figure.
Human Eye and Colourful World Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 11 4


 
Hypermetropia (Long-sightedness): It is a kind of defect in the human eye due to which, a person can see distant objects properly but cannot see the nearby objects clearly. It happens due to
(i) decrease in the power of eye lens i.e., increase in focal length of eye lens.
(ii) shortening of eyeball.
Human Eye and Colourful World Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 11 5

A hypermetropic eye has its least distance of distinct vision greater than 25 cm.
Correction: Since a convex lens has the ability to converge incoming rays, it can be used to correct this defect of vision, as you already have seen in the animation. The ray diagram for the corrective measure for a hypermetropic eye is shown in the given figure.
Human Eye and Colourful World Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 11 6


 
Power of the correcting convex lens:
The Lens formula, 1v−1u=1f can be used to calculate the focal length and hence, the power of the myopia correcting lens.
In this case,
Object distance, u = ∞
Image distance, v =
person’s far point Focal length, f =?
Hence, lens formula becomes
Human Eye and Colourful World Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 11 7
In case of a concave lens, the image is formed in front of the lens i.e., on the same side of the
object.
Focal length = -Far point
Now, power of the required lens (P) = 1f(inm)

 
Power of the correcting convex lens: Lens formula, 1v−1u=1f can be used to calculate focal length f and hence, power P of the correcting convex lens, where,
Object distance, u = -25 cm, normal near point
Image distance, v = defective near point
Hence, the lens formula is reduced to
1v+125=1f
Presbyopia: It is a kind of defect in human eye which occurs due to ageing. It happens due to the following reasons
(i) decrease in flexibility of eye lens.
(ii) gradual weakening of ciliary muscles.
In this, a person may suffer from both myopia and hypermetropia.

Correction: By using a bifocal lens with appropriate power. Bifocal lenses consist of both concave and convex lens, upper position consists of the concave lens and lower portion consists of a convex lens.

Astigmatism: It is a kind of defect in human eye due to which a person cannot see (focus) simultaneously horizontal and vertical lines both.

Correction: By using a cylindrical lens.

Cataract: Due to the membrane growth over eye lens, the eye lens becomes hazy or even opaque. This leads to a decrease or loss of vision. This problem is called a cataract. It can be corrected only by surgery.

Refraction of light through a prism, Dispersion of white light by a glass prism, Composition of white light, Recombination of spectrum colours, Rainbow.

Refraction of light through a prism: When a ray of light is incident on a rectangular glass slab, after refracting through the slab, it gets displaced laterally. As a result, the emergent ray comes out parallel to the incident ray.
Unlike a rectangular slab, the side of a glass prism are inclined at an angle called the angle of prism.

Prism: A prism has two triangular bases and three

Angle of Prism: Angle between two lateral faces is

Angle of Deviation: The angle between the incident deviation.

Dispersion of white light by a glass prism: The phenomenon of splitting of white light into its seven constituent colours when it passes through a glass prism is called dispersion of white light. The various colours seen are Violet, Indigo, Blue, Green, Yellow, Orange and Red. The sequence of colours remembers as VIBGYOR. The band of seven colours is called the spectrum. The different component colour of light bends at a different angle with respect to the incident angle. The violet light bends the least while the red bends most.
Human Eye and Colourful World Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 11 8

Composition of white light: White light consists of seven colours i.e., violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange and red.

Monochromatic light: Light consisting of single colour or wavelength is called monochromatic light, example; sodium light.

Polychromatic light: Light consisting of more than two colours or wavelengths is called polychromatic light, example; white light.

Recombination of white light: Newton found that when an inverted prism is placed in the path of dispersed light then after passing through the prism, they recombine to form white light.

Issac Newton: He was the first, who obtained spectrum of sunlight by using glass prism. He tried to split the spectrum of white light more by using another similar prism, but he could not get any more colours.
He repeated the experiment using second prism in inverted position with respect to the first prism. It allowed all the colours of spectrum to pass through second prism. He found white light emerges on the other side of second prism.
Human Eye and Colourful World Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 11 9
He concluded that Sun is made up of seven visible colour VIBGYOR.

Rainbow: It is the spectrum of sunlight in nature. It is formed due to the dispersion of sunlight by the tiny water droplet, present in the atmosphere.

Formation of the rainbow: The water droplets act like small prism. They refract and disperse the incident sunlight, then reflect it internally, and finally refract it again when it comes out of the raindrop. Due to the dispersion of light and internal reflection, different colours reach the observer’s eye.
Red colour appears on top and violet at the bottom of rainbow.
A rainbow is always formed in a direction opposite to that of Sun.
At ‘A’ – Refraction and dispersion take place.
At ‘B’ – Internal reflection takes place.
At ‘C’ – Refraction and dispersion take place.
Human Eye and Colourful World Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 11 10

Atmospheric Refraction: The refraction of light caused by the Earth’s atmosphere (having air layers of varying optical densities) is called Atmospheric Refraction.

Appearance of Star Position: It is due to atmospheric refraction of star light.
The temperature and density of different layer of atmosphere keeps varying. Hence, we have different medium.
Distant star act as point source of light. When the starlight enter the Earth’s atmosphere, it undergoes refraction continuously, due to changing refractive index i.e. from Rarer to denser. It bends towards the normal.
Due to this, the apparent position of the star is different from actual position. The star appear higher than its actual position.
Human Eye and Colourful World Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 11 11

Twinkling of Star: It is also due to atmospheric refraction.
Distant star act like a point source of light. As the beam of starlight keeps deviating from its path, the apparent position of star keeps on changing because physical condition of earth’s atmosphere is not stationary.
Hence, the amount of light enters our eyes fluctuate sometimes bright and sometime dim. This is the “Twinkling effect of star”.
Human Eye and Colourful World Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 11 12

Why planets do not twinkle ?
Planets are closer to earth and are seen as extended source of light i.e. the collection of large number of point sized sources of light. Therefore the total amount of light entering our eyes from all individual point source will nullify the twinkling effect.

Why, the duration of day becomes approximately 4 minutes shorter if there is no atmosphere on earth: Actual sun rise happens when it is below the horizon in the morning. The rays of light from the sun below the horizon reach our eyes because of refraction of light. Similarly, the sun can be seen about few minutes after the actual sun set. Thus the duration of, day time will increase by 4 minutes.
This is due to atmospheric refraction. Because of this sun is visible about 2 minutes earlier than actual sunrise and about 2 minutes after the actual sun set.

Apparent flattering of the Sun’s disc at sunset and sunrise is due to atmospheric refraction.
Human Eye and Colourful World Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 11 13
Scattering of light: According to Rayleigh’ Law of Scattering, the amount of scattered light ∝ 1λ4 (λ = wavelength)
Scattering of light decreases with increase in wavelength.

Tyndall Effect: When a beam of light strikes, the minute particle of earth’s atmosphere, suspended particles of dust and molecule of air the path of beam become visible. The phenomenon of scattering of light by the colloidal particle gives rise to Tyndall Effect.
It can be observed when sunlight passes through a canopy of a dense forest.
The colour of the scattered light depends on the size of the scattering particles.
Human Eye and Colourful World Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 11 14

Colour of Sunrise and Sunset: While sunset and sunrise, the colour of the sun and its surroundihg appear red. During sunset and sunrise, the sun is near to horizon, and therefore, the sunlight has to travel larger distance in atmosphere. Due to this, most of the blue light (shorter wavelength) is scattered away by the particles. The light of longer wavelength (red colour) reaches our eye. This is why sun appear red in colour.

Why the danger signal or sign is made of red colour?
Red colour scatteres the most when strikes the small particle of fog and smoke because it has the maximum wavelength (visible spectrum). Hence, from large distance also, we can see the red colour clearly.

At noon sun appears white: At noon, the sun is overhead and sunlight would travel shorter distance relatively through the atmosphere. Hence, at noon, the sun appear white as only little of the blue and violet colours are scattered.
Human Eye and Colourful World Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 11 15
Human Eye: It is a wonderful gift of nature to the human body. Human eye is nearly spherical in shape of diameter about 2.5 cm.

Parts of Human Eye:

Cornea: It is the protective and front layer of the eye. It is made by a transparent membrane. Light enters the eye through the cornea.
Iris: Dark and a colourful muscular diaphragm is called iris. It is responsible for colour of the eye.
Pupil: Small circular hole in the centre of iris. It regulates the amount of light entering the eye by adjusting the size of the iris.
Ciliary Muscles: It holds the eye lens at its proper position. It changes the size of eye lens.
Eye lens: The eye lens is a convex lens made by the transparent jelly like material.
Retina: It is the screen of the eye. A real and inverted image form on the retina.
Rods and Cones: These are colour sensitive rods and cones shaped cells. Rods are responsible for the vision in dim light while cones are responsible for colour.
Optic Nerve: It converts information of the image into a corresponding electric signal and passes it to the brain.
Blind Spot: The junction of the optic nerve and retina, where no rods and cones cells are present is called the blind spot. It is insensitive to light.
Near Point: The nearest point from eye at which the eye can see clearly without strain is called near point. For normal eye it is 25 cm.

Far Point: The farthest point, upto which the eye can see the object clearly is called far point. For normal eye it is infinity.

The range of Vision: Distance between near point and far point of eye is called range of vision.

Power of Accommodation: The ability of the eye to see near as well as far objects clearly is called Power of Accommodation.

Myopia (Nearsightedness): In this defect, the eye is unable to see far off objects clearly but is able to see near objects clearly.
Reason.

Due to increase in size of eye ball
Due to excessive curvature of cornea
Due to increase in power (or decrease in focal length) of eye lens.
Correction: It is corrected by using concave lens of suitable focal length.

Hypermetropia (Far sightedness): In this defect eye is unable to see nearby objects clearly but is able to see far objects clearly.
Reason.

Due to decrease in size of eye ball
Due to decrease in power (or increase in focal length) of eye lens.
Correction: It is corrected by using a convex lens of suitable focal length.

Dispersion of Light: Splitting of white light into seven colours is called dispersion. Example, the formation of Rainbow (VIBGYOR). Violet deviates the most but red deviates least.

1. The human eye is one of the most valuable and sensitive sense organs. It enables us to see the wonderful world and the colours around us.

2. The eyeball is approximately spherical in shape with a diameter of about 2.3 cm.

3. Most of the refraction for the light rays entering the eye occurs at the outer surface of the cornea. The crystalline lens merely provides the finer adjustment of focal length required to focus.

4. The human eye has the following parts :

Cornea : The transparent spherical membrane covering the front of the eye.
Iris: The coloured diaphragm between the cornea  and lens.
Pupil: The small hole in the iris.
Eye lens : It is a transparent lens made of jelly like material.
Ciliary muscles: These muscles hold the lens in position.
Retina: The back surface of the eye.
Blind spot: The point at which the optic nerve leaves the eye. An image formed at this point is not sent to the brain.
Aqueous humour: A clear liquid region between the cornea and the lens.
Vitreous humour: The space between eye lens and retina is filled with another liquid called vitreous humour.
5. In the eye, the image is formed on the retina by successive refractions at the cornea, the aqueous humour, the lens and the vitreous humour. Electrical signals then travel along the optic nerve to the brain to be interpreted. In good light, the yellow spot is most sensitive to detail and the image is automatically formed there.

6. Accommodation: The ability of the eye to focus both near and distant objects, by adjusting its focal length, is called the accommodation of the eye or the ability of the ciliary muscles to change the focal length of the eye lens is called accommodation.

7. Defects of the Eye : Although the eye is one of the most remarkable organs in the body, it may have several abnormalities, which can often be corrected with eyeglasses, contact lenses, or surgery. The various defects from which an eye can suffer are (i) Hypermetropia or long sightedness, (ii) Myopia or shortsightedness and (iii) Astigmatism, (iv) Presbyopia.

8. Hypermetropia, hyperopia, or long sightedness : A person suffering from this defect can see distant objects I clearly but cannot see nearby objects clearly. In this defect, the near point lies farther away than 25 cm. Hypermetropia (far sightedness — the image of nearby objects is focussed beyond the retina) is corrected by using a convex lens of suitable power. The eye loses
its power of accommodation at old age.

9. Hypermetropia is due to the following reasons :

Either the hyperopic eyeball is too short or
The ciliary muscle is unable to change the shape
of the lens enough to properly focus the image i.e. the focal length of the eye lens increases.
10. Myopia or short sightedness or near sightedness: A person suffering frommyopia or short sightedness can see nearby objects clearly but cannot see the far away objects clearly. Myopia (short sightedness — the image of distant objects is focussed before the retina) is corrected by using a concave lens of suitable power.

11. This defect is due to the following reasons :

Either the eyeball is longer than normal or
The maximum focal length (due to excessive curvature of the cornea) of the lens is insufficient to produce a clearly formed image on the retina.
12. A person may also have an eye defect known as astigmatism, in which light from a point-source produces a line image on the retina. A person suffering from this defect cannot see in all directions equally well i.e., he cannot see the vertical and horizontal lines simultaneously. This condition arises either when the cornea or the crystalline lens or both are not perfectly spherical. Astigmatism can be corrected with lenses having different curvatures in two mutually perpendicular directions i.e., cylindrical lens.

13. When a person suffers from both, the myopia as well as Hypermetropia, his spectacles for correction have bifocal lenses. The upper half is a concave lens for distant vision and lower half is a convex lens for reading.

14. Presbyopia is that defect of human eye, due to which an old person cannot read and write comfortably. That is why Presbyopia is also called old sight.

15. To correct Presbyopia, an old person has to use spectacles with a convex lens of suitable focal length, or power as explained already.

16. The cause of Hypermetropia is decrease in length of eyeball or increase In focal length of eye lens. But the cause of Presbyopia is only increase in focal length of eye lens. The eyeball, in Presbyopia, has normal length.
the vision of the eye decreases, leading sometimes to total loss of vision. The problem is overcome by cataract surgery i.e., removal of the eye lens, and its replacement by a lens of suitable focal length.

18. We need two eyes because a human being has a horizontal field of view of about 150° with one eye and of about 180° with two eyes. Thus, two eyes provide us wider horizontal field of view.
With one eye, the world looks flat, i.e., two dimensional only. With two eyes, the view is three dimensional, i.e., dimension of depth is added to our view.

19. As our two eyes are separated by a few centimetres, each eye observes a slightly different image. Our brain combines the two views into one and we get to know how close or far away the things seen are.

20. By donating our eyes after we die, one pair of our eyes can give vision to two corneal blind people. Eye donors may belong to any sex or any age group. People suffering from diabetes, hypertension, asthma or any other non- communicable diseases can donate eyes. People who have been using spectacles or those operated for cataract can also donate eyes.

21. The smallest distance, at which the eye can see objects clearly without strain, is called the near point of the eye or the least distance of distinct vision. For a young adult with normal vision, it is about 25 cm.

22. Persistence of vision of the eye: The image of an object persists on the retina for 1/16 second, even after the removal of the object. The sequence of still pictures taken by a movie camera is projected on a screen at a rate of about 24 images or more per second. The successive impressions of images on the screen appear to merge smoothly into one another to give us the feeling of moving images.

23. The large numbers of light sensitive cells contained in the retina of the eye are of two types: rod shaped cells which respond to brightness or intensity of light and cone shaped cells, which respond to colour of light. Thus/cone shaped cells enable us to distinguish between different colours.

24. When a person cannot distinguish between different colours, he is said to be colour blind though his vision may otherwise be normal. Colour blindness is a genetic disorder which occurs by inheritance. So far, there is no cure for colour blindness.

25. Farpoint: The farthest point upto which a short sighted eye can see clearly is called the far point of the eye. For a normal eye, the far point is infinity.

26. Near point : The nearest point upto which a long sighted eye can see clearly is called the near point of the eye. For a normal human eye, of an adult, the near point is about 25 cm from the eye.

27. Least cfistance of distinct vision: The minimum distance upto which an eye can see clearly is called the legist distance of distinct vision ; it is normally denoted by D. The least distance of distinct vision is equal to the distance between the eye and its near point. For a normal human eye, this distance is around 25 cm.

28. The distance between far point and near point of the eye is called range of vision of the eye.

29. When white light passes through a prism, the violet light bends most and the red light bends the least. Dispersion of light is the phenomenon of splitting of white light into its constituent seven colours on passing through a glass prism. The band of seven colours so obtained is called visible spectrum.

30. The seven colours of white light are violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange and red. It is remembered by the acronym VIBGYOR.

31. Isaac Newton was the first to use a prism to obtain a spectrum of sunlight.

32. Spectrum is the band of distinct colours we obtain when white light is split by a prism.

33. Cause of dispersion : Every colour has its own characteristic wavelength/frequency. Different colours move with same speed in air/vacuum. But their speeds in refracting media like glass are different. Therefore, refractive index of the medium for different colours is different. As a result, different colours undergo different deviations on passing through the prism. Hence, different colours emerge from the prism along different directions.

34. The speed of light in vacuum is same for all wavelengths, but the speed in a material substance is different for different wavelengths.

35. In any medium other than air/vacuum red light travels the fastest and violet light travels the slowest.

36. The most familiar form of electromagnetic radiation may be defined as that part of the spectrum that the human eye can detect. Light is produced by the rearrangement of electrons in atoms and molecules. The various wavelengths of visible light are classified with colours ranging from violet (λ = 4 x 10-7 m) to red (λ = 7 x 10-7 m). The eye’s sensitivity is a function of wavelength, the sensitivity being a maximum at a wavelength of about λ = 5.6 x 10-7 m (yellow-green).

37. When we pass white light through two ideptical prisms held side by side with their refracting edges in opposite directions; the first prism disperses white light into seven colours and the second prism recombines the seven colours into white light. Thus, light emerging from 2nd prism is white.

38. A rainbow is formed due to dispersion of light by tiny droplets of water which act as prisms.

39. Atmospheric refraction is the cause of twinkling of stars, advance sunrise and delayed sunset.

40. Scattering of light causes the blue colour of sky and the reddening of the Sun at sunrise and sunset.

Electricity: Electric current, electric circuit, voltage or electric potential, resistance and (Ohm’s law).

Electric Current: The flow of electric charge is known as Electric Current, Electric current is carried by moving electrons through a conductor.
By convention, electric current flows in the opposite direction to the movement of electrons.


 
Electric Circuit: Electric circuit is a continuous and closed path of electric current.


 
Expression of Electric Current: Electric current is denoted by the letter ‘I’. Electric current is expressed by the rate of flow of electric charges. Rate of flow means, the amount of charge flowing through a particular area in unit time.
Electricity Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 12 1
If a net electric charge (Q) flows through a cross-section of a conductor in time t, then,
Electricity Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 12 2
Where I is electric current, Q is a net charge and t is a time in second.


 
S.I. Unit of Electric Charge and Current: S.I. unit of electric charge is coulomb (C).
One coulomb is nearly equal to 6 × 1018 electrons. S.I. unit of electric current is ampere (A). Ampere is the flow of electric charge through a surface at the rate of one coulomb per second. This means, if 1 coulomb of electric charge flows through a cross section for 1 second, it would be equal to 1 ampere.
Therefore, 1 A = 1 C/1 s

Small Quantity of Electric Current: Small quantity of electric current is expressed in milliampere and microampere. Milliampere is written as mA and microampere as pA.
1 mA (milliampere) = 10-3 A
1 pA (microampere) = 10-6 A

Ammeter: An apparatus to measure electric current in a circuit.,


 
Charge: Like mass, the charge is the fundamental property of matter. There are two types of charge
(i) Positive charge.
(ii) Negative charge.

Positive and Negative Charge: The charge acquired by a glass rod when rubbed with silk is called a positive charge and the charge acquired by an ebonite rod when rubbed with wool is called negative charge.

Properties of Electric Charge:
(i) Unlike charges attract each other and like charges repel each other.
(ii) The.force between two charges varies directly as the product of two charges and inversely as the square of the distance (r) between both charges (q1 and q2).
Electricity Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 12 3
S.I. unit of charge is coulomb (C).
1 coulomb = 1 ampere × 1 second.
1C = 1A × 1s
Thus, the quantity of charge which flows through a circuit when one ampere of current flows through it in one second is known as a 1-coulomb charge.


 
Electric Potential and Potential Difference
Electric Potential: The amount of electric potential energy at a point is called electric potential.
Potential Difference: The difference in the amount of electric potential energy between two points in an electric circuit is called electric potential difference.
Electric potential difference is known as voltage, which is equal to the amount of work done to move the unit charge between two points against static electric field.
Therefore, Voltage = WorkdoneCharge
Voltage or electric potential difference is denoted by V’. Therefore, V = WQ
Where, W = Work done and Q = Charge

S.I. Unit of Electric Potential Difference (Voltage)
S.I. unit of electric potential difference is volt and denoted by ‘V’ This is named in honour of Italian Physicist Alessandro Volta.

Since joule is the unit of work and Coulomb is the unit of charge, 1 volt of electric potential difference is equal to the 1 joule of work to be done to move a charge of 1 coulomb from one point to another in an electric circuit. Therefore
1V = 1Joule/1Coulomb = 1J/1C
1V = 1JC-1


 
Voltmeter: An apparatus to measure the potential difference or electric potential difference between two points in an electric circuit.

Galvanometer: It is a device to detect current in an electric circuit.

Ohm’s Law: Ohm’s Law states that the potential difference between two points is directly proportional to the electric current, at a constant temperature.
This means potential difference V varies as electric current.
V ∝ I
V = RI
I = VR
R = VI
Where, R is constant for the given conductor at a given temperature and is called resistance.

Resistance: Resistance is the property of conductor which resists the flow of electric current through it.
S.I. unit of resistance is ohm. Ohm is denoted by Greek letter ‘Q’


 
1 Ohm: 1 ohm (Q) of resistance (R) is equal to the flow 1A of current through a conductor between two points having a potential difference equal to 1V.
This means; 1Ω = 1V1A
From the expression of Ohm’s Law, it is obvious that electric current through a resistor is inversely proportional to resistance. This means electric current will decrease with an increase in resistance and vice versa. The graph of V (potential difference) versus I (electric current) is always a straight line.
Electricity Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 12 4
Graph of Potential Difference (V) Vs Electric Current (I)
Voltage, i.e. Potential diffrence (V) = ?
We know, from Ohm’s Law that,
R = VI
15 Ω = V15A
V = 225V

Resistance: Resistance is a property of conductor due to which it resists the flow of electric current through it. A component that is used to resist the flow of electric current in a circuit is called a resistor.
In practical application, resistors are used to increase or decrease the electric current.

Variable Resistance: The component of an electric circuit which is used to regulate the current, without changing the voltage from the source, is called variable resistance.

Rheostat: This is a device which is used in a circuit to provide variable resistance.

Cause of Resistance in a Conductor: Flow of electrons in a conductor is electric current. The positive particles of conductor create hindrance to flow of electrons, because of attraction between them, this hindrance is the cause of resistance in the flow of electricity.

Factors on Which Resistance of a Conductor Depends: Resistance in a conductor depends on nature, length and area of cross section of the conductor.
(i) Nature of Material: Some materials create least hindrance and hence, are called good conductors. Silver is the best conductor of electricity. While some other materials create more hindrance in the flow of electric current, i.e. flow of electrons through them. Such materials are called bad conductors. Bad conductor are also known as insulators. Hard plastic is the one of the best insulators of electricity.

(ii) Length of Conductor: Resistance (R) is directly proportional to the length of the conductor. This means, resistance increases with increase in length of the conductor. This is the cause that long electric wires create more resistance to the electric current. Thus, Resistance (R) ∝ length of conductor (l)
or, R ∝ l …(i)

(iii) Area of Cross Section: Resistance R is inversely proportional to the area of cross section (A) of the conductor. This means R will decrease with an increase in the area of conductor and vice versa. More area of conductor facilitates the flow of electric current through more area and thus, decreases the resistance. This is the cause that thick copper wire creates less resistance to the electric current.
Thus, resistance (R) ∝ 1/Area of cross section of conductor (A)
or, R ∝ lA ….(ii)
From equations (i) and (ii)
R ∝ lA
R = ρ lA
Where, ρ (rho) is the proportionality constant. It is called the electrical resistivity of the material of conductor.
From equation (iii) RA = ρl ⇒ ρ = RAl ..(iv)

The S.I. of Resistivity: Since, the S.I. unit of R is Q, S.I. unit of area is m2 and S.I. unit of length is m. Hence, unit of resistivity (ρ) = Ω×m2m = Ωm
Thus, S.I. unit of resistivity (ρ) is Ωm.

Resistivity: It is defined as the resistance offered by a cube of a material of side 1m when current flows perpendicular to its opposite faces. It’s S.I. unit is ohm-meter (Ωm).
Resistivity, ρ = RAl
Resistivity is also known as specific resistance.
Resistivity depends on the nature of the material of the conductor.
Materials having a resistivity in the range of 10-8 Ωm to 10-6 Ωm are considered as very good conductors. Silver has resistivity equal to 1.60 × 10-8 Ωm and copper has resistivity equal to 1.62 × 10-8 Ωm.
Rubber and glass are very good insulators. They have a resistivity in the order of 10-12 Ωm to 10-8 Ωm.
The resistivity of materials varies with temperature.

Combination of resistors (Series and Parallel combination), the heating effect of electric current and electric power.
Combination of Resistors
(i) Series combination
(ii) Parallel combination.

1. Resistors in Series: When resistors are joined from end to end, it is called in series. In this case, the total resistance of the system is equal to the sum of the resistance of all the resistors in the system.
Electricity Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 12 5
Let, three resistors R1, R2, and R3 get connected in series.
Potential difference across A and B = V
Potential difference across R1, R2 and R3 = V1, V2 and V3
Current flowing through the combination = I
We, know that
V= V1 + V2 + V3 …. (i)
According to Ohm’s Law :
V1 = IR1, V2 = IR2 and V3 = IR3 ….. (ii)
Let, total resistance = Rs
Then, V = IRs …(iii)
From equations (i) and (ii) and (iii)
IRs = IR1 + IR2 + IR3
Rs = R1 + R2 + R3
When the resistors are connected in series, the current flowing through each resistor is the same and is equal to the total current.

2. Resistors in Parallel: When resistors are joined in parallel, the reciprocal of the total resistance of the system is equal to the sum of reciprocal of the resistance of resistors.
Electricity Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 12 6
Let three resistors R1, R2 and R3 connected in parallel.
Potential difference across point A and B = V
Total current flowing between point A and B = I
Currents flowing through resistors R1, R2 and R3 = I1, I2 and I3 respectively.
We, know that,
I = I1 + I2 + I3 …….(i)
Since, the potential difference across R1, R2, and R3 is the same = V
According to Ohm’s Law,
Electricity Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 12 7
In parallel combination, the potential difference across each resistor is the same and is equal to the total potential difference.
The total current through the circuit can be calculated by adding the electric current through individual resistors.
Itotal = 6A + 48A + 30A + 12A + 24A = 120A

Heating Effect of Electric Current: When electric current is supplied to a purely resistive conductor, the energy of electric current is dissipated entirely in the form of heat and as a result, resistor gets heated. The heating of resistor because of dissipation of electrical energy is commonly known as Heating Effect of Electric Current. Some examples are as follows : When electric energy is supplied to an electric bulb, the filament gets heated because of which, it gives light. The heating of electric bulb happens because of heating effect of electric current.

Cause of Heating Effect of Electric Current: Electric current generates heat to overcome the resistance offered by the conductor through which it passes. Higher the resistance, the electric current will generate higher amount of heat. Thus, generation of heat by electric current while passing through a conductor is an inevitable consequence. This heating effect is used in many appliances, such as electric iron, electric heater, electric geyser, etc.

Joule’s Law Of Heating: Let, an electric current, I is flowing through a resistor having resistance = R.
The potential difference through the resistor is = V.
The charge, Q flows through the circuit for the time, t
Thus, work done in moving of charge (Q) of potential difference (V),
W = V × Q
Since this charge, Q flows through the circuit for time t
Therefore, power input (P) to the circuit can be given by the following equation :
P = WT
P = V × Qt …..(i)
We know, electric current, I = Qt
Substituting Qt = I in equation (i), we get,
P = VI …(ii)
i.e., P = VI
Since, the electric energy is supplied for time ?, thus, after multiplying both sides of equation (ii) by time t, we get,
P × t = VI × t = VIt ……(iii)
i.e., P = VIt
Thus, for steady current I, the heat produced (H) in time t is equal to VIt
H = VIt i.e., H = VIt
We know, according to Ohm’s Law,
V = IR
By substituting this value of V in equation (iii), we get,
H = IR × It
H = I2Rt ……(iv)
The expression (iv) is known as Joule’s Law of Heating, which states that heat produced in a resistor is directly proportional to the square of current given to the resistor, directly proportional to the resistance for a given current and directly proportional to the time for which the current is flowing through the resistor.

Electric Bulb: In an electric bulb, the filament of bulb gives light because of the heating effect of electricity. The filament of bulb is generally, made of tungsten metal, having melting point equal to 3380°C.

Electric Iron: The element of electric iron is made of alloys having high melting poir^ Electric heater and geyser work on the same mechanism.

Electric Fuse: Electric fuse is used to protect the electric appliances from high voltage if any. Electric fuse is made of metal or alloy of metals, such as aluminum, copper, iron, lead, etc. In the case of flow of higher voltage than specified, fuse wire melts and protect the electric appliances.
Fuse of 1A, 2A, 3A, 5A, 10A, etc., used for domestic purpose.
Suppose, if an electric heater consumes 1000W at 220 V.
Then electric current in circuit
I = PV
I = 1000W220V = 4.5 A
Thus, in this case of 5A should be used to protect the electric heater in the flow of higher voltage.

Electric Power
S.I. unit of electric power is watt (W).
1W = 1 volt × 1 ampere = 1V × 1A
I kilowatt or 1kW = 1000 W
Consumption of electricity (electric energy) is generally measured in kilowatt.
Unit of electric energy is kilowatt-hour (kWh).
1 kWh = 1000 watt × 1 hour = 1 unit = 1000 W × 3600 s
1 kWh = 3.6 x 106 watt second = 3.6 × 106 J

Conductor: The material which can allow the flow of electrons through itself is called the conductor. It has a large number of free electrons. It offers low opposition in the flow of current.

Insulator: The material which does not allow the flow of electrons through itself is called insulator. It has less or no free electrons. It offers high opposition in the flow of current.

Electric Current: The amount of flow charge through any cross-sectional area of a conductor in unity time is called Electric Current.
It is represented by ‘I’
I = QT
Unit of Electric Current: It is CS-1 (coulomb per second) or Ampere (A). Electric Current is a scalar quantity. It is measured by an ammeter.

Direction: The direction of conventional current (or practical current) is opposite to the flow of electrons.

Electric potential: Electric Potential at any point in the electric field is defined as the amount of work done to bring the unit positive charge from infinity (from outside the electric field) to that point.
V =WQ, S.I. unit of Electric Potential is JC-1 or volt (V). It is a scalar quantity. The +ve charge flows from higher to lower potential. The -ve charge flows from lower to a higher potential. The difference of electric potential between any two points in the electric field is called Electric Potential difference. It is known as a voltage which is equal to the work done per unit charge between two points against the static electric field.
VAB = VA – VB = WABQ
Electric Potential difference is measured by a voltmeter.

Ohm’s Law: According to this law “Under the constant physical condition the potential difference across the conductor is directly proportional to the current flowing through the conductor.”
V ∝ I
V = IR …[Where R is proportionality constant called resistance of conductor]
⇒ I = VR
R depends upon nature, geometry and physical condition of the conductor.

The heat generated by electric current: The potential difference between two points in an electrical field is equal to the work done in moving a unit charge from one point to another.
Then, work is done, W = VQ and Q = I × t
W = V × I × t
From Ohm’s Law, we know that
V = IR
W = IR × I × t = I2.Rt
Since heat produced by the electric current is equal to work done, W
H = W
⇒ H (heat) = I2Rt Joule.

Resistance: Ratio of the applied voltage to the current flowing in the conductor is called resistance of the conductor.
⇒ R = VI
S.I. Unit of resistance is VA-1 or ohm (Ω).
Resistance is the opposition offered by the conductor in the flow of current.
Practically it is
R ∝ L (L is the length of a conductor)
R ∝ 1/A (A is the area of a conductor)
So, R ∝ L/A
R = ρL/A …[Where p is proportionality constant called specific resistance of conductor
It only depend upon nature (material) and temperature of conductor.

Specific resistance or Resistivity = ρ = RA /L
It’s S.I. Unit is Qm

Combination of resistance:

In this combination the current across every component is same but potential across every component is different.
If resistance R1, R2 and R3 are connected in series with a battery of Potential V, then equivalence resistance of the combination
R = R1 + R2 + R3
The parallel combination of resistance:

In this combination the current across every component is different. But potential across every component is the same.
If resistance R1, R2 and R3 are connected in parallel with a battery of Potential V, then equivalence resistance of combination
1R=1R1+1R2+1R3
Electric Energy is amount of work done to maintain the continuous flow of electric current in the circuit.
Its S.I. unit is joule (J).

Electric power (P): The electric work done per unit time is called electric power.
Electric Power = ElectricworkdoneTimetaken
or P = Wt
Electric power is also defined as the electric energy consumed per unit time.
P = Et
S.I. unit of electric power is Watt. When one joule of energy is used for one second, electric power is equal to one watt.

Derivation of formula for electric power:
We know that electric work done, W = V × I × t or P = VItt
P = VI
Electric power in watts = Volts × ampere
Also V = IR …[According to Ohm’s Law]
So P = IR × I
P = I2R
We know that I = VR
P = (VR)2 × R = V2R Watt
The maximum value of electric current that can pass through an electric appliance without damaging electric appliance is called current rating of electric appliance.


Magnet: Magnetic field and magnetic field lines, Magnetic field due to a current carrying conductor, Right hand thumb rule, Magnetic field due to current through a circular loop. Magnetic field due to current in a solenoid.
Magnet is an object that attracts objects made of iron, cobalt and nickle. Magnet comes to rest in North – South direction, when suspended freely.

Use of Magnets: Magnets are used

in refrigerators.
in radio and stereo speakers.
in audio and video cassette players.
in children’s toys and;
on hard discs and floppies of computers.
Properties of Magnet

A free suspended magnet always points towards the north and south direction.
The pole of a magnet which points toward north direction is called north pole or north-seeking.
The pole of a magnet which points toward south direction is called south pole or south seeking.
Like poles of magnets repel each other while unlike poles of magnets attract each other.
Magnetic field: The area around a magnet where a magnetic force is experienced is called the magnetic field. It is a quantity that has both direction and magnitude, (i.e., Vector quantity).
Magnetic Effects of Electric Current Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 13 1

Magnetic field and field lines: The influence of force surrounding a magnet is called magnetic field. In the magnetic field, the force exerted by a magnet can be detected using a compass or any other magnet.
The magnetic field is represented by magnetic field lines.
Magnetic Effects of Electric Current Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 13 2
The imaginary lines of magnetic field around a magnet are called field line or field line of magnet. When iron fillings are allowed to settle around a bar magnet, they get arranged in a pattern which mimicks the magnetic field lines. Field line of a magnet can also be detected using a compass. Magnetic field is a vector quantity, i.e. it has both direction and magnitude.


 
Direction of field line: Outside the magnet, the direction of magnetic field line is taken from North pole to South Pole. Inside the magnet, the direction of magnetic field line is taken from South pole to North pole.

Strength of magnetic field: The closeness of field lines shows the relative strength of magnetic field, i.e. closer lines show stronger magnetic field and vice – versa. Crowded field lines near the poles of magnet show more strength.


 
Properties of magnetic field lines
(i) They do not intersect each other.
(ii) It is taken by convention that magnetic field lines emerge from North pole and merge at the South pole. Inside the magnet, their direction is from South pole to North pole. Therefore magnetic field lines are closed curves.


 
Magnetic field lines due to current a current carrying straight conductor
A current carrying straight conductor has magnetic field in the form of concentric circles, around it. Magnetic field of current carrying straight conductor can be shown by magnetic field lines.
The direction of magnetic field through a current carrying conductor depends upon the direction of flow electric current.
Magnetic Effects of Electric Current Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 13 3
Let a current carrying conductor be suspended vertically and the electric current is flowing from south to north. In this case, the direction of magnetic field will be anticlockwise. If the current is flowing from north to south, the direction of magnetic field will be clockwise.
The direction of magnetic field, in relation to direction of electric
current through a straight conductor can be depicted by using the Right Hand Thumb Rule. It is also known as Maxwell’s Corkscrew Rule.


 
Right-Hand Thumb Rule: If a current carrying conductor is held by right hand, keeping the thumb straight and if the direction of electric current is in the direction of thumb, then the direction of wrapping of other fingers will show the direction of magnetic field.
Magnetic Effects of Electric Current Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 13 4


 
Maxwell’s Corkscrew rule: As per Maxwell’s Corkscrew Rule, if the direction of forward movement of screw shows the direction of the current, then the direction of rotation of screw shows the direction of magnetic field.
Magnetic Effects of Electric Current Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 13 5

Properties of magnetic field

The magnitude of magnetic field increases with increase in electric current and decreases with decrease in electric current.
The magnitude of magnetic field produced by electric current decreases with increase in distance and vice – versa. The size of concentric circles of magnetic field lines increases with distance from the conductor, which shows that magnetic field decreases with distance.
Magnetic field lines are always parallel to each other.
No two field lines cross each other.
Magnetic field lines due to a current through a circular loop
In case of a circular current carrying conductor, the magnetic field is produced in the same manner as it is in case of a straight current carrying conductor.
Magnetic Effects of Electric Current Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 13 6
In case of a circular current carrying conductor, the magnetic field lines would be in the form of iron concentric circles around every part of the FllmSs periphery of the conductor. Since, magnetic field lines tend to remain closer when near to the conductor, so the magnetic field would be stronger near the periphery of the loop. On the other hand, the magnetic field lines would be distant from each other when we move towards the centre of the current carrying loop. Finally, at the centre, the arcs of big circles would appear as a straight line.

The direction of the magnetic field can be identified using Right Hand Thumb’s Rule. Let us assume that the current is moving in anti-clockwise direction in the loop. In that case, the magnetic field would be in clockwise direction, at the top of the loop. Moreover, it would be in an anti-clockwise direction at the bottom of the loop.


 
Clock Face Rule: A current carrying loop works like a disc magnet. The polarity of this magnet can be easily understood with the help of Clock Face Rule. If the current is flowing in anti – clockwise direction, then the face of the loop shows north pole. On the other hand, if the current is flowing in clockwise direction, then the face of the loop shows south pole.

Magnetic field and number of turns of coil: Magnitude of magnetic field gets summed up with increase in the number of turns of coil. If there are ‘n’ turns of coil, magnitude of magnetic field will be ‘n’ times of magnetic field in case of a single turn of coil.

The strength of the magnetic field at the centre of the loop(coil) depends on :
(i) The radius of the coil: The strength of the magnetic field is inversely proportional to the radius of the coil. If the radius increases, the magnetic strength at the centre decreases
(ii) The number of turns in the coil : As the number of turns in the coil increase, the magnetic strength at the centre increases, because the current in each circular turn is having the same direction, thus, the field due to each turn adds up.
(iii) The strength of the current flowing in the coil: As the strength of the current increases, the strength of three magnetic fields also increases.


 
Magnetic field due to a current in a Solenoid: Solenoid is the coil with many circular turns of insulated copper wire wrapped closely in the shape of a cylinder. A current carrying solenoid produces similar pattern of magnetic field as a bar magnet. One end of solenoid behaves as the north pole and another end behaves as the south pole.
Magnetic Effects of Electric Current Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 13 7
Magnetic field lines are parallel inside the solenoid, similar to a bar magnet, which shows that magnetic field is same at all points inside the solenoid.
Magnetic field produced by a solenoid is similar to a bar magnet.
The strength of magnetic field is proportional to the number of turns and magnitude of current.
By producing a strong magnetic field inside the solenoid, magnetic materials can be magnetized. Magnet formed by producing magnetic field inside a solenoid is called electromagnet.

Electromagnet, Fleming’s Left-Hand Rule, Electric motor, Electromagnetic induction, Fleming’s right hand rule, Electric generator and domestic electic circuits.
Electromagnet: An electromagnet consists of a long coil of insulated copper wire wrapped on a soft iron.
Magnet formed by producing magnetic field inside a solenoid is called electromagnet.
Magnetic Effects of Electric Current Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 13 8

Force on a current carrying conductor in a magnetic field: A current carrying conductor exerts a force when a magnet is placed in its vicinity. Similarly, a magnet also exerts equal and opposite force on the current carrying conductor. This was suggested by Marie Ampere, a French Physicist and considered as founder of science of electromagnetism.
Magnetic Effects of Electric Current Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 13 9
The direction of force over the conductor gets reversed with the change in direction of flow of electric current. It is observed that the magnitude of force is highest when the direction of current is at right angles to the magnetic field.

Fleming’s Left-Hand Rule: If the direction of electric current is perpendicular to the magnetic field, the direction of force is also perpendicular to both of them. The Fleming’s Left Hand Rule states that if the left hand is stretched in a way that the index finger, the middle finger and the thumb are in mutually perpendicular directions, then the index finger and middle finger of a stretched left hand show the direction of magnetic field and direction of electric current respectively and the thumb shows the direction of motion or force acting on the conductor. The directions of electric current, magnetic field and force are similar to three mutually perpendicular axes, i.e. x, y, and z-axes.
Many devices, such as electric motor, electric generator, loudspeaker, etc. work on Fleming’s Left Hand Rule.
Magnetic Effects of Electric Current Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 13 10

Electric motor: A device that converts electrical energy to mechanical energy. It is of two types : AC and DC Motor.
Electrical energy is converted into mechanical energy by using and electric motor. Electric motor works on the basis of rule suggested by Marie Ampere and Fleming’s Left Hand Rule.

Principle of Electric Motor: When a rectangular coil is placed in a magnetic field and a current is passed through it, force acts on the coil, which rotates it continuously. With the rotation of the coil, the shaft attached to it also rotates.
Magnetic Effects of Electric Current Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 13 11
Construction: It consists of the following parts :

Armature: It is a rectangular coil (ABCD) which is suspended between the two poles of a magnetic field.
The electric supply to the coil is connected with a commutator.
Commutator or Split – ring: Commutator is a device which reverses the direction of flow of electric current through a circuit. It is two halves of the same metallic ring.
Magnet: Magnetic field is supplied bv a permanent magnet NS.
Sliding contacts or Brushes Q which are fixed.
Battery: These are consists of few cells.
Working: When an electric current is supplied to the coil of the electric motor, it gets deflected because of magnetic field. As it reaches the halfway, the split ring which acts as commutator reverses the direction of flow of electric current. Reversal of direction of the current, reverses the direction of forces acting on the coil. The change in direction of force pushes the coil, and it moves another half turn. Thus, the coil completes one rotation around the axle. Continuation of this process keeps the motor in rotation.

In commercial motor, electromagnet instead of permanent magnet and armature is used. Armature is a soft iron core with large number of conducting wire turns over it. Large number of turns of conducting wire enhances the magnetic field produced by armature.

Uses of motors :

Used in electric fans.
Used for pumping water.
Used in various toys.
Electromagnetic Induction: Michael Faraday, an English Physicist is supposed to have studied the generation of electric current using a magnetic field and a conductor.
Electricity production as a result of magnetism (induced current) is called Electromagnetic Induction.
Magnetic Effects of Electric Current Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 13 12
When a conductor is set to move inside a magnetic field or a magnetic field is set to be changing around a conductor, electric current is induced in the conductor. This is just opposite to the exertion of force by a current carrying conductor inside a magnetic field. In other words, when a conductor is brought in relative motion vis – a – vis a magnetic field, a potential difference is induced in it. This is known as electromagnetic induction.

Fleming’s Right-Hand Rule: Electromagnetic induction can be explained with the help of Fleming’s Right Hand Rule. If the right hand is structured in a way that the index (fore ginger) finger, middle finger and thumb are in mutually perpendicular directions, then the thumb shows direction of induced current in the conductor, in conductor The directions of movement of conductor, magnetic field and induced current can be compared to three mutually perpendicular axes, i.e. x, y and z axes.
Magnetic Effects of Electric Current Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 13 13
The mutually perpendicular directions also point to an important fact that when the magnetic field and movement of conductor are perpendicular, the magnitude of induced current would be maximum.
Electromagnetic induction is used in the conversion of kinetic energy into electrical energy.

Electric Generator: A device that converts mechanical energy into electrical energy is called an electric generator.
Electric generators are of two types: AC generator and a DC generator. Principle of electric generator: Electric motor works on the basis of electromagnetic induction.
Magnetic Effects of Electric Current Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 13 14
Construction and Working: The structure of an electric generator is similar to that of an electric motor. In case of an electric generator, a rectangular armature is placed within the magnetic field of a permanent magnet. The armature is attached to wire and is positioned in a way that it can move around an axle. When the armature moves within the magnetic field, an electric current is induced. The direction of induced current changes, when the armature crosses the halfway mark of its rotation.

Thus, the direction of current changes once in every rotation. Due to this, the electric generator usually produces alternate current, i.e. A.C. To convert an A.C generator into a D.C generator, a split ring commutator is used. This helps in producing direct current.
Electrical generator is used to convert mechanical energy into electrical energy.

A.C and D.C Current
A.C – Alternate Current: Current in which direction is changed periodically is called Alternate Current. In India, most of the power stations generate alternate current. The direction of current changes after every 1/100 second in India, i.e. the frequency of A.C in India is 50 Hz. A.C is transmitted upto a long distance without much loss of energy is advantage of A.C over D.C.
Magnetic Effects of Electric Current Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 13 15

D.C – Direct Current: Current that flows in one direction only is called Direct current. Electrochemical cells produce direct current.
Advantages of A.C over D.C

Cost of generatior of A.C is much less than that of D.C.
A.C can be easily converted to D.C.
A.C can be controlled by the use of choke which involves less loss of power whereas, D.C can be controlled using resistances which involves high energy loss.
AC can be transmitted over long distances without much loss of energy.
AC machines are stout and durable and do not need much maintenance.
Disadvantages of AC

AC cannot be used for the electrolysis process or showing electromagnetism as it reverses its polarity.
AC is more dangerous than DC.
Domestic Electric Circuits: We receive electric supply through mains supported through the poles or cables. In our houses, we receive AC electric power of 220 V with a frequency of 50 Hz.
The 3 wires are as follows

Live wire – (Red insulated, Positive)
Neutral wire – (Black insulated, Negative)
Earth wire – (Green insulated) for safety measure to ensure that any leakage of current to a metallic body does not give any serious shock to a user.
Short Circuit: Short-circuiting is caused by the touching of live wires and neutral wire and sudden a large current flows.
It happens due to

damage pf insulation in power lines.
a fault in an electrical appliance.
Overloading of an Electric Circuit: The overheating of electrical wire in any circuit due to the flow of a large current through it is called overloading of the electrical circuit.
A sudden large amount of current flows through the wire, which causes overheating of wire and may cause fire also.

Electric Fuse: It is a protective device used for protecting the circuit from short-circuiting and overloading. It is a piece of thin wire of material having a low melting point and high resistance.

Fuse is always connected to live wire.
Fuse is always connected in series to the electric circuit.
Fuse is always connected to the beginning of an electric circuit.
Fuse works on the heating effect.
Magnetic Effects of Electric Current Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 13 16

Magnetic field: The area around a magnet in which other magnet feels force of attraction or repulsion is called Magnetic field.

Magnetic field lines: The closed curved imaginary lines in the magnetic field which indicate the direction of motion of north pole in the magnetic field if a magnet is free to do so.

Properties of magnetic field lines.

Magnetic Field lines originate from the north pole of a magnet and end at its south pole.
Magnetic Field lines are denser near the poles but rarer at other places.
The Magnetic Field lines do not intersect one another.
Oersted’s experiment: According to this experiment “A current carrying wire creates a magnetic field around it. The direction of magnetic field depends on the direction of current in conductor.”

Magnetic field pattern due to straight current carrying conductor are concentric circles whose center lie on the wire.
The direction of magnetic field due to straight current carrying conductor can be determined by Right hand thumb rule.
Right hand thumb rule: According to this rule “if current carrying conductor is held in the right hand in such a way that thumb indicate the direction of current, then the curled finger indicates the direction of magnetic field lines around conductor.”

Magnetic field pattern due to current carrying loop: The Magnetic field lines are circular near the current-carrying loop. As we move away from the loop, field lines form bigger and bigger circles. At the center of the circular loop, the magnetic field lines are straight.

The solenoid is an insulated and tightly wound long circular wire having large number of turns whose radius is small in comparison to its length. Magnetic field produced by a solenoid is similar to the magnetic field produced by a bar magnet.

Current carrying solenoid is called an electromagnet.

Properties of magnetic lines of force or magnetic field lines.

These lines originate from the north pole and end at the south pole.
The magnetic field lines of a magnet form a continuous closed loop.
Two magnetic lines of force do not intersect each other.
The tangent at any point on the magnetic line gives the direction of the magnetic field at the point.
Fleming’s left hand rule: According to this rule, “if the thumb, forefinger and middle finger of the left hand are stretched perpendicular to each other and if the fore-finger gives the direction of magnetic field, middle finger gives the direction of current, then the thumb will give the direction of motion or the force acting on the current-carrying conductor.”

Principle of an electric motor: A motor works on the principle that when a rectangular coil is placed in a magnetic field and current passes through it, a force acts on the coil which rotates it continuously.
When the coil rotates, the shaft attached to it also rotates. In this way the electrical energy supplied to the motor is converted into the mechanical energy of rotation.

Principle of an electric generator: It is based on the principle of electromagnetic induction. It states that “an induced current is produced in a coil placed in a region where the magnetic field changes with time.” The direction of induced current is given by Fleming’s right-hand rule. An electric generator converts mechanical energy into electrical energy.

Electromagnetic induction: The phenomenon of setting up of an electric current or an induced e.mi. by changing the magnetic lines of force by a moving conductor is called electromagnetic induction.

Maxwell’s right hand thumb rule: The direction of the current is given by Maxwell’s right-hand thumb rule, “If the current carrying conductor is gripped with the right hand in such a way that the thumb gives the direction of the current, then the direction of the fingers gives the direction of the magnetic field produced around the conductor.

Fleming’s left-hand rule: The direction of motion of a conductor in a magnetic field is given by Fleming’s left-hand rule. According to this rule, if the thumb, forefinger and middle finger of the left hand are stretched perpendicular to each other and if fore-finger gives the direction of the magnetic field and the middle finger gives the direction of current then, the thumb will give the direction of the motion of the conductor carrying the current.

Fleming’s right-hand rule: The direction of the induced current is given by Fleming’s right-hand rule. According to this rule if the thumb, forefinger and middle finger of the right hand are stretched perpendicular to each other and if the fore-finger gives the direction of the magnetic field and the thumb gives the direction of motion, then the middle finger will give the direction of the induced current in the conductor.

Acids: Indicators, General characteristics, Properties of acids, Chemical nature of acids.

Sources of Energy: A source of energy is that which is capable of providing enough useful energy at a steady rate over a long period of time.

A Good source of energy should be :

Safe and convenient to use, For example; energy nuclear can be used only by highly trained engineers with the help of nuclear power plants. It cannot be used for our household purpose.
Easy to transport, For example; coal, petrol, diesel, LPG etc. have to be transported from the places of their production to the consumers.
Easy to store, For example; huge storage tanks are required to store petrol, diesel, LPG etc.
Characteristics of a good fuel

High calorific value.
Less smoke.
Less residue after burning.
Easy availability.
Inexpensive.
Easy to store and transport.
Classification of Sources of energy
The sources of energy can be classified as follows :

Renewable sources of energy.
Non-Renewable sources of energy.
1. Renewable sources of energy: Renewable sources of energy are those which are inexhaustible, i.e., which can be replaced as we use them and can be used to produce energy again and again.
These are available in an unlimited amount in nature and develop within a relatively short period of time.
Example of Renewable Sources of Energy :

Solar energy.
Wind energy.
Water energy (hydro-energy).
Geothermal energy.
Ocean energy.
Biomass energy (firewood, animal dung and biodegradable waste from cities and crop residues constitute biomass).
Advantages of Renewable Sources of Energy

These sources will last as long as the Earth receives light from the sun.
These sources are freely available in nature.
These sources do not cause any pollution.
2. Non-Renewable Source of Energy: Non-renewable sources of energy are those which are exhaustible and cannot be replaced once they have been used. These sources have been accumulated in nature over a very long period of millions of years.
Examples of Non-renewable Sources of Energy :

Coal.
Oil.
Natural gas.
All these fuels are called fossil fuels.
Disadvantages of Non-renewable Sources of Energy

Due to their extensive use, these sources are fast depleting.
It is difficult to discover and exploit new deposits of these sources.
These sources are a major cause of environmental pollution.
Fossil Fuels: Fossil fuels are the remains of prehistoric plants and animals which got buried deep inside the early millions of years ago due to some natural processes.
These fossil fuels are non-renewable sources of energy and cause environmental problems due to pollution.

Formation of Fossil Fuels: During its formation, an entire organism or its parts often get buried in sand or mud. These, then decay and disintegrate leaving no signs of their existence. Infact, the harder parts of organisms after their death settle down and are covered by sediments and subjected to extreme pressure and temperature or the Earth converts them into fossil fuels, the process being referred to as fossilization.

Disadvantage of Fossil Fuels

The fossils are non-renewable sources of energy and once used cannot be renewed.
Burning of fossil fuels causes air pollution.
The fossil fuels reserves in the Earth are limited and may get exhausted soon.
Thermal Power Plants: It generates electricity from heat produced by combustion of coal and petroleum. For example; fossil fuels.
Use coal, petroleum and natural gas produce thermal electricity.
Electricity transmission is very efficient.
The steam produced by burning fossil fuels nans the turbine to produce electricity.

Source of energy are also classified as

Conventional sources of energy and
Non- conventional sources of energy.
(i) Conventional Sources of Energy are those which are used extensively and meet a marked portion of our energy requirement and these are :
(a) Fossil fuels (coal, oil and natural gas) and
(b) Hydro energy (energy of water flowing in rivers).
Biomass energy and wind energy also fall in this category as these are being used since ancient times.

(ii) Non-conventional Sources of Energy are those which are not used as extensively as the conventional ones and meet our energy requirement only on a limited scale. Solar energy, ocean energy, (tidal energy, wave energy, ocean thermal energy, OTE), Geothermal energy and nuclear energy belong to this category. These sources of energy which have been tapped with the aid of advances in technology to meet our growing energy needs are also called alternative sources of energy.


 
Renewable Sources of Energies
1. Solar Energy: The energy produced by the sun in the form of heat and light energy is called as solar energy.
Solar radiations can be converted electricity through solar cells (Photovoltaic cells).
Photovoltaic cells convert solar radiations directly into electricity through silicon solar cells.
Solar cells arrange on a large flat sheets form a Mirror solar panel.
Solar cookers are painted black from outside and a large glass plate to trap solar radiations by green house effect.
Sources of Energy Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 14 1

Advantages of Solar Cookers

Eco-friendly.
Renewable.
Used in rural areas.
Retains all the nutrients in food due to slow cooking.
Disadvantage of Solar Cookers :

Silicon cells are expensive.
Solar radiations are not uniform over the Earth’s surface.
Cannot be used at night or on cloudy days.
Cannot be used to make chapattis for frying as these require a temperature of 140°C or more. (Maximum temperature of 100°C only can be achieved in a solar cooker) Other Solar Devices are Solar water heater and Solar furnace.
2. Wind Energy: When large masses of air move from one place to another then it is referred to as wind. During this process, kinetic energy gets associated with it which is referred to as wind energy.
It can be converted into mechanical and electrical energy.
Kinetic energy of wind is used in running of windmills, which are used to lift water, grind grains etc.
Sources of Energy Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 14 2

Uses of Wind Energy
The important uses of wind energy are :

It is used to drive windmills, water lifting pumps, and flour mills, etc.
It is used to propel sale boats.
It is used to fly engine fewer airplanes or gilders in the air.
It is used to generate electrically used for various purposes like lightning, heating, etc.
Advantages:

Eco-friendly
Renewable.
Disadvantages :

Wind speed does not uniform always.
Needs a large area to erect series of windmills.
Big amount of investment is needed.
The output is less as compared to investment.
3. Hydro Power Plant (hydro energy): When the water flowing in a river is stored in a high rise dam and allowed to fall from the top of the dam. The water rushes down with a great force, which can be utilized to drive large water Lurbine. These turbines are connected with electric generators which generate electric current. The electricity generated in this process is termed as hydroelectricity or hydel power. In fact the process involves transference of potential energy of the water into kinetic energy’ and then into electric energy.
It is the most conventional renewable energy source obtained from water falling from a great height.
It is clean and nonpolluting source of energy.
Dams are constructed to collect water flowing in high altitude river. The stored water has a lot of potential energy.
When water is allowed to fall from a height, potential energy changes to kinetic energy which rotates the turbines to produce electricity.
Sources of Energy Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 14 3

Advantages of Hydro Power Plant :

It is readily and abundantly available everywhere free of cost.
It is eco-friendly and does not produce any kind of environmental pollution.
It is a renewable source as water itself is a renewable and inexhaustible resource.
It is a cheap source of energy, as it does not involve any costly investment.
Disadvantages of Hydro Power Plant

Highly expensive to construct.
Dams cannot be constructed on all river sites.
Large areas of human habitation and agriculture fields get submerged.
People face social and environmental problems.
4. Geothermal Energy: Geothermal energy is the heat of the Earth and is the naturally occurring thermal energy found within rock formations and the fluids held within those formations.
Energy harnessed from the heat of the Sun is called Geo Thermal Energy.
Magma is formed when this heat melts the rocks. The rocks and hot gases are called magma.
The magma gets collected at some depths below the Earth’s surface. These places are called ‘Hot spots’.
When underground water comes in contact these hot spots, it changes into steam, which can be used to generate electricity.

Advantages of Geo Thermal Energy

Renewable
Inexpensive
Disadvantages of Geo Thermal Energy

Only a few sites are available for harnessing energy.
Expensive
5. Ocean Energy: The oceans acquire almost 71% of the surface of the Earth. The enormous amount of water present in them did not act as a big collector of solar heat energy, but also store large amount of it due to its high specific heat. Thus, ocean water can be used as a renewable resource of energy.
The main forms of ocean energy are described as under :
(i) Ocean Thermal Energy: The energy available due to the temperature difference between the deeper levels and surface of an ocean is called as Ocean Thermal Energy,

(ii) Ocean Tidal Energy: The rise of ocean water due to the attraction of the moon is referred to as high tide and its fall as low tide. The enormous movement of water due to high and low tide provide a large amount of energy known as Ocean Tidal Energy. This tidal energy can be utilized by constructing a tidal barrage or dam.


 
(iii) Sea Wave Energy: The energy obtained from the high-speed sea waves is referred to as sea wave energy. Infact, these high-speed sea waves have a lot of kinetic energy associated with them, which can be used to drive dynamos which convert kinetic energy into electrical energy.

(iv) Energy from Nuclear Deuterium of Oceans: The oceans water contains an unlimited amount of heavy hydrogen isotope called as deuterium which is isotope hydrogen having one neutron in its nucleus. Scientists are working hard to produce energy by carrying the controlled nuclear fission of deuterium isotope. The process is still in its experimental stage.


 
(v) Energy From Salinity Gradient in Seas: The difference in the concentration of salts in the water of the two or more seas is called a salinity gradient. This salinity gradient is now a day used to obtain energy with the involvement of suitable techniques,

(vi) Energy From Sea Vegetation or Biomass: Sea vegetation or biomass is another direct source of energy because the enormous amount of seaweeds present in the sea water provides an endless supply of methane fuel.
Disadvantages: Uniform tidal action is not seen.

6. Bio-Mass: Biomass is defined as living matter or its residue and is a renewable sources of energy.
The biomass includes

all the new plant growth
agriculture and forest residues (like Bio-gases, dark, sea dust, wood savings, roots, animals dropping, etc..),
Carbonaceous wastes (like sewage, garbage, night-soil, etc.)
Biodegradable organic effluent from industries.
It is the source of the conventionally used fuels that are used in our country. For example; Cow dung cakes, fire-wood, coal, charcoal etc.
Sources of Energy Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 14 4
Bio-gas: It is a mixture of gases produced during decomposition of bio mass in the absence of oxygen. (Anaerobic Respiration). Methane is the major component of bio-gas.
Bio-gas plants: Animal dung, sewage, crop residues, vegetable wastes, poultry dropping, etc. are used to produce Bio-gas in Bio-gas plants.

Advantage of Bio-gas

A Bio-gas plant, is quite simple, can easily be built in rural areas. A small plant using dung from 3 to 4 heads of cattle is capable of supplying Bio-gas for 6 hours daily for cooking purposes.
Bio-gas is a clean fuel that burns without smoke and leaves no ash.
The main constituent of Bio-gas, i.e., ethane has a higher calorific value (55 kj/g) that of petrol (50kj/g).
The spent slurry, being rich in nitrogen and phosphorus is good manure.
By using Bio-gas, firewood is saved and deforestation is reduced.
Composition of Bio-gas: Bio-gas is mainly composed of methane (up to 75%), C02 (25%) and traces of other gases such as nitrogen and hydrogen. Whereas methane is a high-value calorific fuel, carbon dioxide is an inert gas.

7. Nuclear Energy: A reaction in which, the nucleus of an atom undergoes a change to form a new atom and releases an enormous amount of energy is called as nuclear energy. There are two distinct ways of obtaining nuclear energy, (a) Nuclear fission and (b) Nuclear fusion.
Energy released when some changes take place in the nucleus of the atom of a substance is called Nuclear energy.
It is used for heat generation, fuel for marine vessels.

Advantages of Nuclear Energy

The alternative source of energy due to depletion of fossil fuels.
From a small amount of fuel, a large amount of energy is released.
Disadvantages of Nuclear Energy :

Risk of nuclear waste leakage.
High cost of setting up of nuclear plant.
Pollution of environment.
Environmental consequences of the increasing demand for energy :

The combustion for fossil fuels produces acid rain and damages plants (crops), soil and aquatic life.
The burning of fossil fuels is increasing the amount of greenhouse gas, carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
The construction of hydropower plants is a disturbing ecological balance.
Nuclear power plants are increasing radioactivity in the environment.
Difference between Nuclear Fission and Fusion

Nuclear Fission	Nuclear Fusion
1. It involves breaking of a heavy nucleus into lighter nuclei.	1. It involves the binding of two nuclei.
2. It is carried out by the bombardment of neutrons over a heavy nucleus.	2. It is carried out by heating an extreme temperature.
3. It is a chain reaction.	3. It is not a chain reaction.
4. It is a controlled process.	4. It is an uncontrolled process.
5. It produces an enormous amount of energy.	5. It produces more energy than nuclear fission.
6. Fission products are hazardous.	6. It does not cause pollution.
Need for Energy: The ability of a body to do work is called energy. No activity will occur without energy. So energy is required in all walks of life.

Characteristics of a good source of energy.

It should be able to do a large amount of work for each unit of mass or volume.
It should be easily accessible.
It should be easily transported.
It should be economical.
Conventional Sources of Energy.
The sources of energy which have been in use since a long time are called conventional sources of energy. For example, Coal, petroleum, natural gas, hydel energy, wind energy and nuclear energy are considered to be the conventional sources of energy. Firewood is also a conventional source of energy but its usage is now limited to kitchens in rural India.

Fossil Fuels.
Coal: Coal was formed millions of years ago. The plants got buried under swamps and due to high pressure and high temperature inside the earth; they were converted into coal. Coal is the highest used energy source in India. During the days of the steam engine, coal was used in steam engines. Moreover, coal was also used as kitchen fuel; before LPG became popular. Nowadays, coal is mainly being used in industries.


 
Petroleum: Petroleum was also formed millions of years ago. The animals got buried under the ocean surface and were converted into petroleum; in due course of time.
Petroleum is the third major source of energy being used today. Petroleum products are used as automobile fuel and also in the industries. Natural gas mainly comes from the oil wells and is also a major source of energy.

Non-renewable Sources of Energy.
It takes millions of years for the formation of fossil fuels. Since they cannot be replenished in the foreseeable future, they are known as non-renewable sources of energy.

Renewable Sources of Energy.
Those sources of energy which can be replenished quickly are called renewable sources of energy. Hydel energy, wind energy and solar energy are examples of renewable sources of energy.


 
Hydel Energy: Hydel energy is produced by utilizing the kinetic energy of flowing water. Huge dams are built over a source of water. Water is collected behind the dam and released. When the water falls on the turbine; the turbine moves; because of kinetic energy of water. Thus, electricity is generated by the turbine. Electricity; thus generated is called hydel energy or hydroelectricity.

Limitations of Hydroelectric Plants.

Dams can be constructed only in a limited number of places, preferably hilly areas.
Large areas of agricultural land and human habitation get destroyed by the cons¬truction of dams.
Large eco-systems get submerged under water. The vegetation which is submerged underwater rots under anaerobic conditions and gives rise to large amounts of methane which is a greenhouse gas.
Rehabilitation of displaced people is another major problem.
Thermal Power Plant: In a thermal power plant, coal or petroleum is used for converting water into steam. The steam is used to rim the turbine; to generate electricity.

Biomass: The material obtained from the bodies of plants and animals is called biomass.
Examples: cattle dung, sewage, crop residue, wood, etc.


 
Biogas: Biogas is a mixture of methane, carbon dioxide, hydrogen and hydrogen sulphide. It contains 65% of methane gas. Biogas is produced by the anaerobic degradation of bio¬mass in the presence of water but in the absence of air.

Wind Energy: Wind energy has been in use since ages. Windmills have been in use; especially in Holland; since the medieval period. Nowadays, windmills are being used to generate electricity. The kinetic energy of wind is utilized to run the turbines; which generate electricity. At present, Germany is the leading country in terms of wind energy production and India comes at number five. In India, Tamil Nadu is the largest wind energy producing state. The largest wind farm in India is near Kanyakumari; in Tamil Nadu; which generates 380 MW of electricity.

Limitations of Wind Energy: Wind farms can only be established at those places where the wind speed is high enough and is more than 15 km/hr for most parts of the year. Wind farms need to be established on large tracts of land. The fan of the windmill has many moving parts; so the cost of maintenance and repair is quite high. The initial cost of establishing a wind farm is very high.

Non-conventional Sources of Energy: Energy sources which are relatively new are called non-conventional sources of energy, e.g., nuclear power and solar energy.


 
Solar Energy: The sun is the main source of energy for all living beings on this earth. Even the energy in the fossil fuels has come from the sun. The sun has an endless reservoir of energy which would be available as long as the solar system is in existence. Technologies for harnessing the solar energy have been developed in recent times.

Solar Cooker: Solar cooker is very simple in design and mode of function. It is usually made from mirrors. Plain mirrors are placed inside a rectangular box. The light reflected from the plain mirrors concentrates the solar energy inside the solar cooker which generates enough heat to cook food.

Solar Furnace: Solar furnace is made like a concave mirror. Large solar furnace has many smaller mirrors to compose a very large convex mirror. The thing to be heated is placed near the focus of the mirror.

Solar Cells: Solar cells are made from silicon. The solar panel converts solar energy into electrical energy which is stored in a battery; for later use.

Limitations of Solar Energy: The technologies for harnessing solar energy are at a nascent stage. At present, the cost-benefit ratio for using solar energy is not conducive. Using solar energy is exorbitantly costly.

Tidal Energy: Due to the gravitational pull of the moon, tides happen near seashores. Water rushes up near the seashore during high tide and goes down during low tide. Dams are built near seashores to collect the water which comes during a high tide. When the water runs back to the ocean, the flow of water can be utilized to generate electricity.

Wave Energy: Waves can also be a good source of energy. Many devices are being designed and tested to produce wave energy. For example; a hollow tower is built near the seashore. When water gushes in the tube because of wave, it forces the air upwards. The kinetic energy of air in the tube is used to run a turbine. When the wave goes down; air from up goes down the tube which is also used in running the turbine.

Ocean Thermal Energy: The water at sea surface is hot during the daytime, while the water at a lower level is cold. The temperature differential in water levels can be utilized to generate energy. If the temperature differential is more than 20°C, then ocean thermal energy can be utilized from that place. For this, a volatile liquid; like ammonia; is boiled using the heat from the hot water at the surface. The steam of the volatile liquid is utilized to run the turbine to generate electricity. Colder water from the surface below is utilized to condense ammonia vapour which is then channelized to the surface to repeat the cycle.

Geothermal Energy: Heat energy from molten rocks present inside the earth created under certain favourable conditions by natural processes is called geothermal energy. It is the only type of energy which does not use solar energy.

Nuclear Energy: Nuclear fission is the process during which a bigger nucleus breaks to produce two smaller nuclei. The process generates a huge amount of energy. This phenomenon is utilized in nuclear power plants. Nuclear power is safest for the environment but the risk of damage due to accidental leaks of radiation is pretty high. Further, the storage of nuclear waste is a big problem because of the potential risk of radiation involved.

Advantages of nuclear energy.

A very large amount of energy can be produced by a nuclear process on using very small amount of nuclear fuel in a nuclear reactor.
The energy so produced can be easily transformed into electrical energy.
It does not produce harmful gases.


Biodegradable and Non-biodegradable Wastes, Ecosystem, Components of Ecosystem. The environment includes our physical surroundings like air (or atmosphere), water bodies, soil (land and all the organisms such as plants, animals, human beings and micro-organisms like bacteria and fungi (called decomposers). The waste materials produced by the various activities of man £nd animals are poisonous to some extent and can be divided into two main groups

1. Biodegradable Wastes: Substances that are broken down by the biological processes are said to be biodegradable. These substances are decomposed through the actions of fungi, bacteria, and other living organisms. Temperature and sunlight also play an important role in the decomposition of biodegradable substances.
For Examples: Food waste, trees leaves, urine and fecal matter, sewage agricultural residue, paper, wood, cloth, cow-dung etc.


 
2. Non-Biodegradable Wastes: Substances that are not broken down by biological
processes. These substances may be in solid, liquid or gaseous form. These substances are inert and simply persist in the environment for a long time or may harm the various members of the ecosystem.
For Examples: These includes DDT (Di-chloro-di phenyl trichloro ethane-in-pheneyle the cheoro ethane), insecticides, pesticides, mercury, lead, arsenic aluminum, plastics, polythene bags, glass, radioactive wastes. These non-biodegradable wastes are major pollutants of the environment.


 
Harmful effects of biodegradable and Non-Biodegradable Substance

The waste destroys the natural beauty and our surroundings become dirty.
Decomposition of these wastes results in the production of foul smell, which spreads to the surrounding areas.
These wastes may also block the drains creating pools of waste, which becomes the breeding sites of mosquitoes. The latter is carriers of diseases like malaria and dengue.
Difference between Biodegradable and Non-Biodegradable wastes

Biodegradable wastes	Non-Biodegradable wastes
1. The wastes that are broken down naturally by microbial action.	1. The wastes that are not broken down by the microbes.
2. Biodegradation forms harmless and non- poisonous products.	2. No such action is possible.
3. They release raw materials back to nature.	3. They do not release raw materials.
4. They pollute the environment only when they are produced in quantity beyond the capacity of the environment to degrade them.	4. Non-biodegradable wastes pollute the environment even in small quantity.
5. Bioconcentration does not occur.	5. Bioconcentration or biomagnifications occurs when wastes enter food chains.
6. Recycling is possible both naturally or through human efforts.	6. Recycling is possible only through human efforts.
Ecosystem: An ecosystem is a self-contained unit of living things (plants, animals and decomposers), and their non-living environment (soil, air and water). For example; a forest, a pond, a lake, a green land etc.
In an ecosystem, energy and matter are continuously exchanged between living and non¬living components.
An ecosystem can be both natural or man-made. Some examples of natural ecosystems are grass land, forest, sea, river, desert, mountain, pond, lake etc.

The desert, grass land and mountains represent the terrestrial ecosystem (land-based ecosystem).
The ponds, rivers, lakes and sea represent the aquatic ecosystem (water-based ecosystem). Man-made artificial ecosystems are garden, crop fields, park, aquarium, etc.
Our Environment Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 15 1


 
Components of Ecosystem: There are two components of an ecosystem : (i) biotic component and (ii) abiotic component.
1. Biotic component: It includes three types of organisms :
(a) Producers: All green plants, blue green algae can produce their food (Sugar and starch) from inorganic substance using light energy (Photosynthesis). Therefore, all green plants are called producers. They are also called autotrophs.
Planktons are very minute or microscopic organisms freely floating on the surface of water in a pond, lake, river or ocean. Planktons are of two types : Phytoplanktons and Zooplanktons.
The microscopic aquatic plants freely floating on the surface of water are called phytoplanktons.
The microscopic aquatic animals freely floating on water are called zooplanktons. The freely floating protozoa are an example of zooplankton.


 
(b) Consumers: They are organisms which consume other organisms or their products as their food. All animals belong to this category. The consumers depend upon producers for their food directly or indirectly. They get their food by eating other organisms or their products. For example, man, goat, deer, fish, lion, cow, buffalo, etc., are common consumers.
The consumers can be classified into the following types :

Herbivores.
Carnivores.
Parasite.
Omnivores.
Our Environment Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 15 2

(i) Herbivores: These are organisms (animals) which get their food by eating the producers (or plant) directly. Herbivores are also called first order consumers. Some common examples of herbivores are : deer, rabbit, rat, squirrel, goat, cattle, etc.

(ii) Carnivores: These are organisms (animals) which consume other animals. Therefore, carnivores feed on the flesh of herbivores. These are also called primary carnivores or second order consumers. Some common examples are snake, wild cat, jackal, frog, some birds, fishes, etc.
There are animals which prey upon primary carnivores. They are called second order consumers or third order consumers. For example, owl, peacock, tiger, lion, etc., are some second order carnivores and may be eaten by third order carnivores. The carnivores which are not preyed upon further are called top carnivores. For example, lion is a top carnivore.


 
(iii) Omnivores: The organisms which feed on both plants and animals are called omnivores. Human beings are common example of omnivores because they eat both plants (For example; pulses, grams, oilseeds, fruit, etc.) and animal products (milk, meat, egg, etc.).

(c) Decomposers: Fungi and bacteria which break down (decompose) the dead plants, animals complex compounds into the simpler one. The decomposers help in the replenishment of natural resources. These are also known as microorganism or saprotrophs. These are also called reducers.

Importance of Decomposers

Decomposers help in disposing of the wastes and dead bodies of plants and animals. Therefore, they clean the environment and create space for a living of newer generations of organisms.
The decomposers release minerals and other raw materials trapped in organic matter. These are picked up by plants. This also helps to maintain the fertility of soil.
The decomposers produce some acids which are useful in solubilization of some minerals.
Decomposers help in recycling the materials in the biosphere so that, the process of life may go on and on like an unending chain.
2. Abiotic Components: These are non-living components of an ecosystem. These include the physical environment.

Edaphic factors like soil texture, topography, water, and air.
Inorganic substances like carbon dioxide, nitrogen, oxygen, water, phosphorus, sodium, potassium, and calcium. These are involved in the cyclic of materials in the ecosystem.
Organic compounds like proteins, carbohydrates, and lipids. These largely form the living body and link the abiotic and biotic components.
Climatic factors: These are sunlight temperature, pressure humidity, moisture, rainfall, etc. these factors affect the distribution of the organisms.

Functions of an Ecosystem

Ecosystem indicates available solar energy and the efficiency of an ecosystem to trap the same.
It gives information about the available essential minerals and their recycling periods.
It provides knowledge about the web of interactions and inter-relationship among the various population as well as between the population and the abiotic environment.
It helps human beings to know about conservation of resources, protection from pollution and inputs required for maximizing productivity.
In the ecosystem, two processes of energy flow and biogeochemical cycles (nutrients movement) proceed side by side. The energy flow is unidirectional while the movement of nutrients is cyclic.
Food chain, Food web, Trophic levels. Flow of energy ten percent law, Depletion of the ozone layer, Biological magnification. Mode of waste disposal.

Food Chain: The sequence of living organisms in a community in which one organism consumes another organism to transfer food energy, is called a food chain.
A food chain is unidirection where transfer of energy takes place in only one direction.
OR
Food chain is sequential process which represents “who eats whom”.
OR
Food chain refers to an arrangement of different biotic groups in a sequence of energy transfer. These biotic groups are producer herbivores, carnivores.
For example, T1(Grass) → T2(Deer) → T3(Lion)


 
Examples of Food Chains: Simple food chain operating in a grass land or forest
Grass(Producer) → Deer(Herbivore) → Lion(Carnivore)
In this food chain, grass represent the producers (first tropic level). Grass synthesize their own food by the process of photosynthesis. Grass is eaten up by deer, which represents the herbivores or the primary consumers. Deer in turn is consumed by lion, the carnivores or the secondary consumers.
A food chain in grassland which has four steps is :
Grass(Producers) → Insect(Herbivores) → Frog(Carnivores) → Eagle(Secondary Carnivore)

Significance of Food Chains

The study of food chains helps in understanding food relationships and interactions among the various organisms in an ecosystem. The food chains, transfer energy and materials between various living components of an ecosystem.
The food chains transfer energy and materials between various living components in an ecosystem or biosphere.
The food chains give dynamicity to an ecosystem or biosphere.
The movement of toxic substances like pesticides, weedicides, etc., through food chains, can prove very harmful.
Food Web: The inter-connected food chains operating in an ecosystem which establish a network of relationship between various species, are called a food web.
In a food web, one organism may occupy a position in more than one food chain. An organism can obtain its food from different sources and in turn, may be eaten up by different types of organisms.
Our Environment Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 15 3

Trophic Levels: The various steps in the food chain at which the transfer of food (or energy) takes place is called trophic levels.
There is a gradual decrease in the amount of energy transfer from one trophic level to the next trophic level in a food chain.
Our Environment Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 15 4
So only 10% of energy is transferred to next trophic level while 90% of energy is used by present trophic level in its life processes.
The various trophic levels are given below :

The plant or the producers constitute the first trophic level.
The herbivores or primary consumers form the second trophic level.
Carnivores or secondary consumers make up the third trophic level.
Large carnivores or the tertiary consumers which feed upon the small carnivores constitute the fourth trophic level.
Flow Open Energy
Energy is used and conveyed from one trophic level to another in a food chain. This is called flow of energy. Green plants capture about 1% of the solar energy incident on the Earth through the biochemical process of photosynthesis. A part of this trapped energy is used by plants in performing their metabolic activities and some energy is released as heat into the atmosphere. The remaining energy is chemical energy stored in the plants as ‘carbohydrates’. When plants are eaten up by herbivores, the chemical energy stored in the plants is transferred to these animals. These animals (herbivores) utilize some of this energy for metabolic activities, some energy is “released as heat and the remaining energy is stored. The process of energy transferred is similarly repeated with carnivores and so on.

Ten percent law: Ten percent law states that only 10 percent of the energy entering a particular trophic level of organisms is available for transfer to the next higher trophic level.
Our Environment Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 15 5
For example, Suppose 1000 J of solar energy is received by green plants, then only 1% of solar energy available on earth is utilized by plants. So only 10 J (1% of 1000 J) is trapped by plants and the rest 990 J of energy is lost to the environment. So, plants utilizes only 10 J of energy. Next, only 10% of the 10 J energy of plant, that is, 1 J, is available to the herbivore animal while 9 J is lost to the environment. Again, just 10% of the 1 J of energy of herbivore animals is utilized by carnivore animals. Thus, carnivore animals have only 0.1 J of energy while 0.9 J is lost to the environment.


 
Environmental Problems: Changes in the environment affect us and our activities change the environment around us. This led to the slow degradation of the environment that arose many environmental problems. For Example; depletion of the Ozone Layer and waste disposal.

Depletion of Ozone Layer: Ozone (O3) layer is largely found in the stratosphere which is a part of our atmosphere from 12 km -50 km above sea level. This region is called ozonosphere. Ozone is deadly poisonous at the ground level.
Ozone is formed as a result of the following photochemical reaction.
Our Environment Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 15 6
Ozone layer is a protective blanket around earth which absorbs most of the harmful U.V. (Ultraviolet) radiation of the Sun, thus, protecting the living beings of the Earth from health hazards like skin cancer, cataract in eyes, weaken immune system, destruction of plants etc. The decline of Ozone layer thickness in Antarctica was first discovered in 1985 and was termed as OZONE HOLE.

Steps taken to limit damage of ozone layer: Excessive use of CFCs (Chloro Flouro Carbon) a synthetic, inert chemical. For example; Freon which are used as refrigerants and also in fire extinguishers caused Ozone depletion in the upper atmosphere. A single chlorine atom can destroys 1,00,000 Ozone molecules. U.N.E.P. (United Nation Environment Programme) did an excellent job in forging an agreement to freeze CFC production at 1986 levels (KYOTO Protocol) by all countries.

Biological Magnification: The increase in concentration of harmful chemical substances like pesticides in the body of living organisms at each trophic level of a food chain is called biological magnification.
Example:
Our Environment Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 15 7
Maximum concentration of such chemicals gets accumulated in human bodies.

Garbage Disposal: Industrialization and rise in demand of consumer goods have created a major problem in the form of wastes/garbage accumulation and its disposal especially in urban areas.
The disposal of waste should be done in a scientific way. There are different methods of waste disposal. The method to be used depends on the nature of the waste. Some of the important modes of waste disposal are :

Incineration: Burning of waste on high temperature to form ash is called incineration. This process is carried out in an incinerator. Incineration is used to destroy household, chemical and biological wastes.
Open dumping: A conventional method in which solid waste are dumped in selected areas of a town. It actually cause pollution
Land fillings: Wastes are dumped in low living areas and are compacted by rolling with bulldozers
Composting: Organic wastes are filled into a compost pit (2m × 1m × 1m). It is then covered with a thin layer of soil. After about three months the same garbage filled inside the pit changes into organic manure.
Recycling: The solid wastes is broken down into its constituent simpler materials. These materials are then used to make new items. Even non-bio degradable solid wastes like plastic, metal can be recycled.
Reuse: A very simple conventional technique of using an item again and again. For example; paper can be reused for making envelops, etc…
Environment: The combination of all the physical and biological conditions affecting the responses of living organisms is called environment.

Biodegradable wastes: The wastes which are broken down by the activity of micro¬organisms and enter into the biogeochemical cycle are known as biodegradable wastes.

Non-biodegradable wastes: The wastes which cannot be broken down by the enzymes produced by microorganisms into simpler and harmless products in nature are called non- biodegradable wastes.

Garbage: Domestic wastes including the kitchen waste are termed as garbage.

Incineration: Destruction of waste materials by burning at high temperature is called incineration.

Biotic Community: A group of various populations of organisms living in a region is called the biotic community.

Ecosystems: The self-contained and distinct functional unit capable of independent existence made by the interaction of living and non-living components is called an ecosystem.

Ecosystem component consists of two components- Abiotic and biotic

Abiotic: Components consist of inorganic and organic substances and climatic factors.
Biotic: Components consist of a living organism.
Autotrophs: Those organisms which can produce their own food are called autotrophs or producers. All green plants are producers.

Consumers: Those organisms which are unable to synthesise their food themselves and consume the food produced by producers or eat other organisms as food, are known as consumers.

Decomposers: Bacteria and fungi which break down the complex organic compounds present in the dead plants and animals and their products into simpler substances are known as decomposers.

Food Chain: A series of organisms in a community in which one organism consumes another organism to transfer food energy is called a food chain.
Characteristics:

A food chain helps in understanding the food relationship and interactions among various organisms in an ecosystem.
There is a progressive decline in the amount of energy available as we move from one trophic level to another in a food chain.
Trophic levels: Each step of the food chain is known as a trophic level. 10% of food taken by one trophic level is available for the next trophic level.

Food Web: The web formed by the interconnection of food-chains of the various trophic levels is called a food web.

Biomagnification: The increase in the concentration of the harmful chemicals in the body of an
organism per unit its mass at each successive trophic level in a food chain is known as biomagnification.

Ozone Depletion: The thinning of the ozone layer is called ozone depletion.

Ozone-depleting substances: Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), oxides of nitrogen, methane, carbon tetrachloride and chlorine are the ozone-depleting substances.

Four practices which can help in the protection of our environment:

Disposal of wastes after separating them into biodegradable and non-biodegradable waste material.
Use of unleaded petrol and alternate sources of energy, and keeping the engine properly tuned and serviced and the tyres inflated to the right pressure so that the vehicle runs efficiently.
The use of gunny bags and paper bags in place of polythene/plastic bags.
Activities such as gardening, rain-water harvesting and use of compost in place of fertilizers will help protect our environment from further damage.
Harmful effects of agricultural practices on the environment.

Excessive use of fertilisers changes the chemistry of soil and kills useful microbes.
Excessive use of non-biodegradable chemical pesticides leads to biological magnification.
Extensive cropping causes loss of soil fertility.
Excess use of groundwater for agriculture lowers the water table.
Agricultural practices lead to some amount of damage to the natural ecosystem/habitat.
1. Environment: The physical, chemical and ‘ biological conditions of the region in which an organism lives is called its Environment. It includes air, light, soil, temperature, water and the presence or absence of other organisms, i.e., the conditions for development or growth.
The environment has three main components, viz :

Physical surroundings [soil, air and water bodies]
Living organisms [plants, animals, decomposers (bacteria and fungi)]
Meteorological factors (or climatic factors) . [sunlight, temperature, rainfall, humidity, pressure and wind speed].
2. Physical environment: It is also called a abiotic or non-living environment. It includes :

Soil, water bodies and air on the surface of the earth.
Meteorological factors.
The physical environment is essential for :

Supply of nutrient elements to the living beings.
Providing space to the organisms for living.
Controlling weather of a place.
3. Biotic (or biological) environment: It includes :

Plants.
Animals (including human beings).
Decomposers (bacteria and.fungi).
Other important constituents of the biotic environment includes Kites and vultures as they feed on dead organisms and act as scavengers (cleansing agents) of the environment.

4. Ecosystem: A community of organisms, interacting with each other, plus the environment in which they
live and with which they also interact. The examples of the ecosystem are a pond; a desert; a forest; a lake; a river; a mountain; the sea.
All the above ecosystems are made up of two main components.
our-environment-cbse-notes-for-class-10-science-1

5. Autotrophs (Producers) and Heterotrophs (consumers):
our-environment-cbse-notes-for-class-10-science-2

6. Food chain: The sequence of living organisms in a . community in which one organism.e^ts other and is
itself eaten by another organism to transfer energy is called a food chain. It is also defined as, “chain of organisms, existing in any natural community, through which energy is transferred”.

7. Ozone layer : Ozone (O3) is a molecule formed by three atoms of oxygen unlike oxygen which is required for respiration by aerobic forms, ozone is a deadly poison. However, at the higher levels of the atmosphere,

ozone performs an essential function. It shields the surface of the earth from ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the Sun. This radiation is highly damaging to organisms, for example, it is known to cause skin cancer in human beings.
Ozone at the higher levels of the atmosphere is a product of UV radiation, acting on oxygen (O2) molecule. The higher energy UV radiations split apart some molecular
oxygen (O2) into free oxygen (O) atoms. These atoms then combine with the molecular oxygen to form ozone as shown:
our-environment-cbse-notes-for-class-10-science-3
Depletion of ozone layer: Ozone layer gets depleted – due to the use of chemicals called aerosol, spray propellants like chlorofluorocarbons. Depletion of ‘ ozone layer would cause skin cancer in men and animals and severe damage to the plants.

8. Biological magnification: It means accumulation of non-biodegradable chemicals (like pesticides) in the living organisms (like plants, animals, including man) in a food chain. “The increase in the concentration of harmful chemicals in the body of living organisms at each trophic level of a food chain is called biological magnification”.

9. Biodegradable wastes and Non-biodegradable wastes:
our-environment-cbse-notes-for-class-10-science-4

10. A generalised food chain:
our-environment-cbse-notes-for-class-10-science-5

11. Food web: A food web is a network of food chains which establish a network of relationships between various species. Food web showing 8 interlinked food chains.
our-environment-cbse-notes-for-class-10-science-6
our-environment-cbse-notes-for-class-10-science-7

13. The flow of energy between various components of the environment:

Green plants capture about 1 % of the energy and convert it into food energy.
About f % of the food eaten is turned into the body of an organism and made available for the next level of consumers.
About 10% of organic matter is present at each step and reaches the next level of consumers.
Since so little energy is available for the next level of consumers, food chains generally consist of only three or four steps. The loss of energy at each step is so great that very little usable energy remains after four trophic levels.
There are generally a greater number of individuals at the lower trophic levels of an ecosystem, the greatest number is of the producers.


nything in the environment which can be used is called a natural resource.

Natural Resources includes total natural environment that support human life and contribute to the production of necessities and comforts to mankind. So natural resources are the coihponents of atmosphere, hydrosphere and lithosphere.


 
Types of Natural Resources: On the basis of abundance and availability, the natural resources are of two types

Inexhaustible.
Exhaustible.
(a) Inexhaustible: These are in plenty and cannot be exhausted by man’s consumption. For example; air, sand, clay etc. It gets affected by the over-population of mankind.
(b) Exhaustible: These are limited and can get exhausted over a period of time, i.e., coal, petroleum etc.

Management of Natural Resources: A system of controlling the use of natural resources in such a way, as to avoid their wastage and to use them in the most effective way is called management of natural resources.


 
Why do we Need to Manage Our Natural Resources: We need to manage our natural resources because of the following reasons :

The resources of the earth are limited. Because of the rapid increase in human population,
the demand for resources is increasing day-by-day. The proper management can ensure that the natural resources are used judiciously, so that they fulfill the needs of present generation and also last for the generations to come. –
The proper management of natural resources takes into consideration long-term perspective (or view) and prevents their exploitation to hilt for short-term gains.
The proper management can ensure equitable distribution of natural resources so that all the people can benefit from the development of these resources.
The proper management will take into consideration the damage caused to the environment during the ‘extraction’ or ‘use’ of the natural resources and find ways and means to minimise this damage.
Conservation of Wildlife: It is very important to conserve wild-life to maintain the ecological balance in nature and to preserve the gene pool. Some of the measures (or steps) to be taken for the conservation of wildlife are given below:

Laws should be made to impose a total ban on the poaching (killing) or capturing of any animal or bird belonging to an endangered species.
The natural habitats of wild animals and birds should be preserved by establishing National Parks and Sanctuaries throughout the country.
The Government Department connected with the conservation of wildlife should conduct a periodic survey in all the forests, National parks and Sanctuaries to have knowledge of the population of all species of wild animals and birds.
Special attention should be paid to the conservation of endangered species of wild animals and birds to prevent their extinction altogether.
The unauthorized felling (cutting) of forest trees for timber trade and fuel-wood should be curbed (stopped) immediately.
Forest and wild life conservation: Forests are biodiversity hot spots. Biodiversity of an area is the number of species of different life forms like bacteria, fungi, powering plants insects, birds, etc.
Hotspot means an area full of biological diversity.

 

loss of diversity may lead to a loss of ecological stability/ecological imbalance.

 

Stake holders: A person having interest or concern for something is called as a stakeholder.
Management of Natural Resources Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 16 1

Sustainable Management: Management of forest resources wisely to make it available for future generations.
To consider the conservation of forests, we need to look at the stakeholders who are :

The people who live in or around forests are dependent on forest products for various aspects of their life.
The Forest Department of the Government which owns the land and controls the resources from forests.
The industrialists—from those who use ‘tendu’ leaves to make bidis to the ones with papermills who use various forest produce.
The wild life and nature enthusiasts who want to conserve nature in its pristine form.
A major program called silviculture has been started to replenish the forests by growing more trees and plants.
Conservation of forests: It is carried out by the following methods

Afforestation: It is growing of forests on unprotected barren lands. Van Mahotsava is a tree plantation movement carried out twice a year (February and July) by both government and voluntary agencies.
Reforestation: It is developing forest cover in the area which has been damaged or cleared during exploitation.
Separation of Commercial Forestry: Useful plants required by industry should be planted separately preferably on waste land. Growing industry required plants is called production plantation.
Grazing: Grazing should be regulated according to the availability of pasturage.
Deforestation: Removal, decreases or deterioration of forest cover of an area is called deforestation.
Effects of Deforestation

Soil Erosion: Removal of plant cover exposes the fertile soil to wind and water. The latter remove the top soil and make the area infertile.
Desertification: Removal of forest cover in the plains makes the area dry. In hot season, the soil becomes loose. Air currents take away the fine soil particles leaving behind sand.
Floods: In rainy season many temporary rivulets are formed due to loss of absorption capacity by unprotected soil. The rivulets produce floods in low land causing loss to agriculture, property and life.
Destruction of wildlife: Deforestation leads to destruction of natural habitats of wild animals and plants. Wildlife is, therefore, destroyed.
Climatic Changes: In the absence of forest cover, the summer becomes hotter while the winters become extra cool. The frequency of rainfall decreases.
National Award for Wildlife Conservation: The Govt, of India, has recently instituted an ‘Amrita Devi Bishnoi National Award for wildlife conservation in the memory of Amrita Devi, who in 1931 sacrificed her life along with 363 other for the protection ‘Khejri Trees’ in Kherali Village near Jodhpur in Rajasthan.

Chipko Andolan: Movement originated in Garhwal in early 1970’s that was the result of a grassroot level effort to end the alienation of people from their forest.
Thus, Chipko Movement (i.e., chipko Andolan) is the tree hugging movement, in which the villagers compel the axeman to stop tree felling by embracing and forming ring (circle) around the marked trees. Example : Protection of Sal Forest in West Bengal in 1972.
Management of Natural Resources Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 16 2
Re-use is better than recycling as it saves energy.

Water as a Resource

Water is a basic necessity for all terrestrial forms of life. Regions of water scarcity are closely
related to the regions of acute poverty.
Failure to sustain water availability has resulted in loss of vegetation cover, diversion for high water demanding crops and pollution from industries and, urban wastes and less rain.
Irrigation methods like dams, tanks should be used in various part of India.
Advantages of Dams

Water from a dam is used for irrigation in fields through a network of canals. Dams ensure round the year water supply to the crop fields and help raise agricultural production.
Water from a dam is supplied to the people in towns and cities through pipelines after suitable treatment. In this way, construction of dams ensures continuous water supply in the region.
The falling water (or flowing water) from the dam is used for generating electricity. The water rushing down the dam turns turbines which run electric generators.
Disadvantages of Dams

Social Problems: Due to the construction of high-rise dams, a large number of human settlements (or villages) are submerged in the water of large reservoir formed by the dam and many people are rendered homeless. This creates a social problem.
Environmental Problems: The construction of high-rise dams on the rivers contributes to deforestation and loss of biodiversity. This is because a vast variety of flora and fauna (plants and animals) get submerged in the water of large reservoir formed by the dam and disturb the ecological balance.
Economic Problems: Some people say that the construction of high-rise dams involves the spending of a huge amount of public money without the generation of proportionate benefits.
Forests: Forests are important renewable natural resources dominated mainly by trees forming a sort of canopy, they are essential for the ecological balance of all ecosystems. They maintain the biological ecosystem.

Water Harvesting: Aim is to develop primary resources of land and water and to produce secondary resources of plants and animals for use in a manner which will not cause ecological imbalance.
Various ancient methods of water harvesting

Methods	State
Khadin, tanks, nadis	Rajasthan
Banderas, tals	Maharashtra
Bundhis	Madhya Pradesh and U.P.
Pyhes and Pynes	Bihar
Kulhs	Himachal Pradesh
Ponds	Jammu Region
Eris (tanks)	Tamilnadu
Baylis – Old method of water harvesting in Delhi and nearby region.
These techniques are local specific to ensure the mismanagement and over-exploitation of these resources.

Advantages of Water Harvesting System

Water does not evaporate.
Recharge wells and moisture for vegetation.
Does not provide breeding grounds for mosquitoes.
Ground water is protected from contamination by human and animal waste.
Pollution of Water: The pollution of water is caused by the dumping of untreated sewage and industrial wastes into it.
The contamination of river water can be usually found from two factors :

the presence of coliform bacteria in river water, and
measurement of pH of river water.
Gangs Action Plan (GAP): Muticrore project came in 1985 to improve the quality of Ganga. Ganga Action Plan (GAP) was formulated to reduce the pollution load of river Ganga by more than 75%. The water quality has been tested from time-to-time by checking coliform (a group of harmless bacteria in human intestine) number/100 ml.
Accordingly, a survey was conducted and data was collected for total coliform (a group of bacteria found in human intestine) between 1993-1994 which was as below:
Management of Natural Resources Class 10 Notes Science Chapter 16 3
MPN – Most Probable Number.

Advantages of Water Stored in the Ground

The water stored in the ground does not evaporate.
The water stored in the ground spreads out to recharge wells and provides moisture for crops over a wide area.
The water stored in the ground does not promote the breeding of mosquitoes (unlike stagnant water collected in ponds or artificial lakes).
The water stored in the ground is protected from contamination by human and animal waste.
Coal and Petroleum Conservation: Coal and petroleum are fossil fuels found in earth’s
crust. They are non-renewable and exhaustible resources.
1. Coal: Coal is combustible fossilized rock derived from a large accumulation of plant remains that is gradually compressed. Coal is used for cooking, heating, in industry and thermal power plants.
2. Petroleum: Petroleum is another fossil fuel that occurs in the form of liquid oil. It has been formed in the past (about 10 to 20 crore years old) from plant and animal remains and occur in the form of mineral oil in sedimentaiy rocks. Petroleum is mainly used as fuel for transport, agricultural operations, generators and some industries.

Methods of Conservation of Fossil Fuels

Burning of coal causes air pollution. Thus direct use of coal for the purpose or burning should be avoided. Coal may be converted into liquid fuel and compressed natural gas (CNG) through coal gasification.
Techniques should be developed to recover maximum fossil fuel that lies in deep mines and wells. Wastage during extraction and transportation should be avoided.
Both oil wells and coal mines are prone to catch fire. Therefore, these should be well protected from fire to avoid wastage pollution and loss of life and property.
Over-consumption of oil in automobiles should be checked. We must save oil for future use because only a few years are left for its depletion.
Alternative sources of energy, such as hydroelectric, nuclear, solar, wind power and biogas plants should be encouraged.
Steps for Conservation of Energy Resources

Save electricity, water, etc. by not using when not required.
Use energy efficient electrical appliances to save electricity.
Use pressure cooker for cooking food.
Use solar cookers.
Encourage the use of biogas as domestic fuel.
Fuel efficient motor vehicle should be designed to reduce consumption of petrol and diesel.
Management of natural resources is needed for the conservation of natural resources.

There are national and international laws and Acts to protect the environment.
Ganga Action Plan. Multi Crore Project came in 1985 to improve the quality of Ganga — Accordingly a survey was conducted and a data was collected of total coliform (a group of bacteria found in human intestine) between 1993-1994 National Award for wildlife conservation – In the memory Amrita Devi Bishnoi who lost her life in the protection of Khejri trees in Rajasthan along with 363 other people.
Chipko Movement: Chipko Movement is an example of the contribution of common people towards the conservation of forests. The Chipko Movement also called ‘Hug the tree’ movement originated from an incident in a remote village called ‘Reni’ in Garhwal (Himalayas), where the people of this village clasped the tree trunks with their arms to protect them from being cut down by a contractor’s workers. The people acted this way because they knew that this mass deforestation would spoil their healthy environment. The forest trees were thus saved.

The Chipko Movement quickly spread across all the communities and helped in the conservation of forests and thus helped in safeguarding the environment.

Three R’s to save the environment.

Reduce: It means we should minimise our use of natural resources, sources of energy and food materials.
Recycle: It means that we should collect materials like paper, plastics, glass and metal items. These waste materials should be recycled to obtain these materials again for use.
Reuse: In this strategy, we should be encouraged to use things again and again instead of throwing them away. For example, plastic bottles those we get with jams and pickle can be reused for storing things in the kitchen.
Forest and wildlife conservation: Forests are biodiversity hot spots. Biodiversity of an area is the number of species of different life forms like bacteria, fungi, powering plants insects, birds etc. The main aim of forest conservation is to preserve the biodiversity we have inherited.

Stakeholders: Those persons, who are directly or indirectly involved in using the produce of forests or are interested in the conservation of forests, are called stakeholders.


 
Hotspot: means an area full of biological diversity. Loss of diversity may lead to a loss of ecological stability/ecological imbalance.

Sustainable management: Management of forest resources wisely to make it available for future generations. Sustainable development is development encourages the judicious use of natural resources to meet the current basic human needs, while preserving the resources for the needs of future generations.

Water as a Resource: Water is a basic necessity for all terrestrial forms of life.

Regions of water scarcity are closely correlated to the regions of acute poverty.
Failure to sustain water availability has resulted in the loss of vegetation cover, diversion for high water demanding crops and pollution from industries and urban wastes and less rain.
Irrigation methods like dams, tanks and coals have been used in various part of India.
Dams: In order to make proper use of river water, dams are constructed across the rivers to regulate the flow of water. A dam has a large reservoir to store huge amounts of water. This stored water is then allowed to flow downstream at the desired rate.
Advantages.

Water from a dam is used for irrigation in fields through a network of canals. Dams ensure round the year water supply to the crop fields and help raise agricultural production.
The water rushing down the dam turns turbines which run electric generators to generate electricity.
Disadvantages.
Construction of large dams addresses three problems in particular-

Social problem. A large number of local people have to be displaced which includes farmers and tribals without their adequate compensation or rehabilitation.
Economic problem. As dams are built up with huge amounts of public money without the generation of proportionate benefits.
Environmental problem. Because the making of large dams contributes enormously to deforestation and the loss of biological diversity.
Water Harvesting: Collecting rainwater for use in future by storing it in storage reservoirs is called rainwater harvesting.
Various ancient methods of water harvesting. These techniques are locale specific to ensure the mismanagement and over-exploitation of these resources.
Advantages of Khadin System

Water does not evaporate
Recharge wells and moisture for vegetation.
Does not provide a breeding ground for mosquito
Groundwater is protected from human and animal waste.
Green House Effect: When the reflected back infra-red rays (of longer wave-length) of the Sun are entrapped by C02 gas of atmosphere, the atmosphere gets warmed. This phenomenon is known as ‘Green House Effect’.

1. A coliform is a group of bacteria, found in human intestines, whose presence in water indicates contamination by disease-causing microorganisms.


 
2. In 1985, our government started a multi-crore project named as ‘Ganga Action Plan’. The main aim of this project is to improve the water quality of Our holy river Ganga.

3. The water of the river Ganga gets polluted because of the following reasons :

Dumping of untreated sewage.
Human activities like bathing or washing of clothes.
Immersion of ashes or unburnt corpses.
Chemical effluents from industries.
This all pollutes water, increasing the toxicity level which kills fish in large sections of the river.

4. One should keep in mind the three R’s to save the environment:
Reduce: Using less and less of natural resources.
One can help by switching off unnecessary lights and fans, repairing leaky taps, preventing wastage of food.
Recycling: It minimises the faster depletion of natural resources.
Reuse: It is better than recycling because the process of recycling uses some energy.


 
5. Economic development is linked to environmental conservation.

6. The concept of sustainable development encourages forms of growth that meet current basic human needs, while preserving the resources for the needs of future generation.

7. The sustainable development : It implies a change in all aspects of life. It depends upon the willingness of the people to change their perceptions of the socioeconomic and environmental conditions around them and the readiness of each individual to alter their present use of natural resources.

8. Sustainable natural resource management demands the following:

Using resources carefully because these are not unlimited.
A long term perspective so that these resources will last for the generations to come and will not merely be exploited for short-term gains.
Equitable distribution of resources so that all and not just a handful of rich and powerful people, benefit from the development of these resources.
Checking the damage caused to the environment while these resources are either extracted or used,
Planning for the safe disposal of the waste which is generated when natural resources are either extracted or used.
9. Forests are ‘biodiversity hot spots’. One measure of the biodiversity of.an area is the number of different species found there. However, the range of different life forms (such as bacteria, fungi, ferns, flowering plants, nematodes, insects, birds, reptiles and so on) is also important.

10. One of the main aim of conservation is to try and preserve the biodiversity that we have inherited.

11. A loss of diversity may lead to a loss of ecological stability.

12. Forest resources ought to be used in a manner that is both environmentally and developmentally sound.

13. The destruction of forests not only affects the availability of forest products, but also the quality of soil and the sources of water.

14. Despite nature’s monsoon bounty, failure to sustain water availability underground has resulted largely from the loss of vegetation cover, diversion for high water demanding crops and pollution from industrial effluents and urban wastes.

15. Dams are built to ensure the storage of adequate water not only for irrigation but also for generating electricity. However, building of large dams cause social, economic and environmental problem.

16. Watershed Management: Watershed management emphasises scientific soil and water conservation in order to increase the biomass production. The aim is to develop primary resources of land and water, to produce secondary resources of plants and animals for use in a manner which will not cause ecological imbalance. Watershed management not only increase the production and income of the watershed
: community, but also mitigates droughts and floods and increases the life of the downstream dam and reservoirs.

17. The Chipko Andolan (‘Hug the Trees Movement’) :
It started in a remote village called Reni in Garhwal in early 1970s. In this movement, women of the village used to clasp the tree trunks thus preventing the felling of trees.
Role of Chipko Andolan :

It helped in conservation and preservation of forests, one of the most important natural resources.
It allowed the village communities to utilise the forest produce and allowing the resource to replenish over time.
It taught people that, the destruction of forests not only affects the availability of forest products but also the quality of soil and the sources of water.
It forced government to rethink the priorities of the local people (to whom the forests belong) in the use of forest produce.
It encouraged the participation of the local people in the efficient management of forests.
18. Stakeholders of forest:

People living in or around forest: They depend on forest produce for their living.
The forest Department of the Government : Which owns the land and controls the resources from forests.
The industrialists : Who use various forest produce as raw material, but are not dependent on the forest in any orie area.
The wildlife and nature enthusiasts: Who want to conserve nature in its pristine form.
19. Water harvesting : It is an age-old concept in India which involves capturing rainwater in the large structures which can hold this water round the year. The main purpose is not only to hold the surface water but also to recharge the groundwater beneath.
Advantages of water harvesting :

The water does not evaporate, but spreads out to recharge wells and provides moisture for vegetation over a wide area.
It does not provide breeding grounds for mosquitoes like stagnant water collected in ponds or artificial lakes.
The groundwater is also relatively protected . from contamination by human and animal
wastes.
It raises the groundwater level.

